

===== PAGE 1 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.DOI
Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography:
a Survey
CARLOS A. LARA-NINO 1, ARTURO DIAZ-PEREZ 2, AND MIGUEL MORALES-SANDOVAL 1
1CINVESTA V Tamaulipas. “Parque Cientíﬁco y Tecnológico TECNOTAM – Km. 5.5 carretera Cd. Victoria-Soto La Marina C.P. 87130 Cd. Victoria, TAMPS,
México.” (e-mail: {clara,mmorales}@tamps.cinvestav.mx)
2CINVESTA V Guadalajara. “Av. del Bosque 1145, colonia el Bajío C.P. 45019 Zapopan, JAL, México.”
Corresponding author: Carlos Andres Lara-Nino (e-mail: clara@tamps.cinvestav.mx).
This work was supported by CONACyT under grant number 336750 and CINVESTA V . This work was also funded by “Fondo Sectorial de
Investigación para la Educación", CONACyT Mexico, through the project number 281565.
ABSTRACT Since it was invented in 1986, Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) has been studied widely in
industry and academy from different perspectives. Some of these aspects include mathematical foundations,
protocol design, curve generation, security proofs, point representation, algorithms for inherent arithmetic in
the underlying algebraic structures, implementation strategies in both software and hardware, attack models,
among others. The main advantage of ECC is that shorter keys (less memory requirements and faster ﬁeld
arithmetic operations) can be used if compared to other cryptosystems, which has made it the ideal choice for
implementing public key cryptography in resource constrained devices, as the ones found in the envisioned
applications of the Internet of Things (IoT), e.g. wireless sensors. In this application domain, lightweight
cryptography has emerged as the one required because of the scarce computing resources and the limited
energy in devices. In this paper we present a survey of ECC in the context of lightweight cryptography. The
aim of this work is to identify the criteria that make an ECC-based system lightweight and a viable solution
for using in practical constrained applications. Representative works are systematically revised to determine
the key aspects considered in ECC designs for lightweight realizations. As a result, this paper deﬁnes, for
the ﬁrst time, the concept and requirements for Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography (ECLC).
INDEX TERMS Cryptography, Elliptic Curve, Lightweight, Survey.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N recent years, the trend in manufacturing of electronic
devices has been marked by the reduction of their physical
size, the push to reduce production costs, and the incre-
ment of the connectivity of said appliances. Smart objects,
which are capable of performing small computations and
data collection, become more ubiquitous each day. All of the
information which is collected from these objects can provide
insights on the behavior of its user or its environment. Hence
the need to protect these data.
A constrained environment is considered a computational
system of multiple heterogeneous elements, where the un-
derlying computational devices are of limited capabilities.
These limitations are related to the processing power, the
communications bandwidth, the storage memory, the size of
the device, or the energy availability of the devices. Examples
of constrained devices are the Wireless Sensor Network
(WSN) motes, Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) tags,
and Internet of Things (IoT) nodes, thus WSN, RFID, and
IoT applications are considered constrained environments.
Providing security services for these new generation net-
works has proven to be a difﬁcult challenge. Strict constraints
on resources such as processor time, bandwidth, hardware,
and in some cases energy supply, restricts the security al-
gorithms that can be utilized. These applications require at
least the same security services of a conventional network,
even having less processing power. Moreover, like in the
case of WSN, the constrained devices might be deployed
in hostile environments and an attacker can have physical
access to the network. Additional security measures, such as
side channel countermeasures, should be considered to patch
these vulnerabilities.
A. CRYPTOGRAPHY FOR CONSTRAINED DEVICES
Some of the most important security services required in IoT
include privacy (conﬁdentiality), trust (integrity, authentica-
tion), nonrepudiation (signature, access control), and avail-
ability. For some instances, protection against a node capture,
impersonation, duplication of the data, and forensic attacks is
also required. Cryptography can provide the means for most
VOLUME 4, 2016 1


===== PAGE 2 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
of the demanded security services in this domain.
However, as pointed out by NIST “[...] cryptographic
standards were designed to perform well on general-purpose
computers” [1]. But modern technologies have capabilities
far more limited than general-purpose computers. As it is
also mentioned in the NIST report, it is often the case that
conventional cryptographic algorithms can be implemented
to ﬁt the resource requirements of constrained applications.
But this comes at the cost of reduced performance and lower
efﬁciency. It can be inferred that conventional cryptography
can be used to provide security services under constrained
environments, but it might not be the best solution.
The push for newer algorithms which satisfy the security
needs of IoT and other such systems has created a new branch
in cryptography denominated Lightweight Cryptography. Its
aims are to provide privacy, integrity and trust among other
services, by using symmetric and asymmetric mechanisms,
but taking into consideration reductions in the implementa-
tion sizes, the processing latencies, and the energy costs of
the solution. This ﬁeld is an evolving study area, not only the
security paradigms change, new attack models are revealed,
and security levels are phased out.
Lightweight cryptography is related to the problem of
providing security to constrained environments by means
of low-cost cryptographic algorithms. It is the set of tools
designed to offer security services with reduced costs. The
optimizations followed in this approach generally involve
tradeoffs between implementation size, performance, and
security.
It results difﬁcult to determine a threshold value for a
cryptographic primitive to be denominated lightweight, with
reference to one or more metrics of interest: physical size,
latency, energy. Take as example the literature for cryp-
tographic hardware solutions where lightweight symmetric
algorithms have shown to require an order of magnitude less
area units than their generic counterparts at the cost of re-
duced performance. Current understanding of “lightweight-
ness” also includes performance and energy as critical design
goals. Designing security solutions that can be denominated
“lightweight”, while achieving small implementation size,
low energy consumption, and adequate performance is a
challenging task.
In the past decade, the study of lightweight cryptographic
primitives has gained popularity. First initiated with focus on
block ciphers and later on hash functions, this ﬁeld of re-
search has propelled the development of multiple algorithms,
some of which have been standardized [2]. Most recently,
the focus of lightweight cryptography has translated from
symmetric to asymmetric constructions. However, whereas
the progress for the former has been steady and fruitful, the
latter has found moderate success.
Some of the challenges in lightweight asymmetric algo-
rithms are the complexity of the operations, the size of the
operands, the lengthy delays in processing, and the relentless
advance of attack models which threaten any hasty proposal.
B. LIGHTWEIGHT PUBLIC KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY
Keyed cryptographic algorithms are those requiring some
secret material (key) to protect the data. They can be divided
in two main groups: symmetric and asymmetric. The ﬁrst
group includes all the systems which use a single secret key
in their operation. From the key nature it follows that this
area is known as Symmetric Cryptography. The algorithms
that form the second group use a key pair instead, where
one of the keys is private and the other public. The key
pair is generally created from a mathematical function that
establishes a relation between the private and the public
key, but with special properties to avoid deriving the private
key from the public one. This second group of algorithms
constitutes what is known as Asymmetric Cryptography or
Public Key Cryptography (PKC).
PKC is critical for networked environments. It has been
used in encryption, signatures, digital envelopes and key
establishment to provide conﬁdentiality, integrity, authentica-
tion, nonrepudiation, availability and access control services.
PKC is a costly security mechanism especially for con-
strained devices. Encryption and digital signatures in PKC
demand complex group operations. The operands used in
these procedures can have lengths of thousands of bits in
some cases. From the different PKC alternatives reported in
the literature, those that rely on elliptic curves are the most
favorable for implementation in restricted devices.
Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) utilizes an elliptic
curve deﬁned over a ﬁnite ﬁeld Fq, which is denoted by
E(Fq) and contains the afﬁne points (x,y ) ∈ Fq × Fq that
satisfy the Weierstrass equation (1).
y2+a1xy+a3y =x3+a2x2+a4x+a6, whereai ∈ Fq (1)
E(Fq) together with a special point named the point at
inﬁnity O form an abelian group. O serves as the neutral
element in the group operation. The security of ECC rests
on the difﬁculty of solving the Discrete Logarithm Problem
over such a group, abbreviated as ECDLP, for which only
algorithms with exponential computational complexities are
known.
It is not an easy task to ﬁnd a group E(Fq) with the
required properties that make the ECDLP difﬁcult to solve.
Hence, the elliptic curves known to be secure are reported in
the literature and included in standards. Conventional PKC
based on ECC generally uses these standardized structures,
which deﬁne secure realizations of ECC but that were not
thought to be utilized in constrained environments. In recent
years, the deﬁnitions for new elliptic curves not only seek
to achieve high security levels, but also to reduce opera-
tional costs and to reduce the hardware resources required to
perform computations efﬁciently. These new elliptic curves
are left out of the scope of standards but are an attractive
alternative for WSN, RFID, e-health, and other emerging
technologies in the IoT domain.
In this work we address ECC solutions that are suit-
able for constrained applications and therefore denominated
2 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 3 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
FIGURE 1. Wordcloud for Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography (ECLC).
lightweight. In the literature is has not been demonstrated if
lightweight realizations of ECC are due to 1) the underlying
mathematical model, or 2) the design and implementation de-
cisions. The review presented in this work provides insights
on which elliptic curves are the most used or considered for
a lightweight ECC implementation. We ultimately identify
the characteristics of the primitives and requirements that
shape the Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography (ECLC)
concept and provide guidelines for the future development
of such systems. Figure 1 shows a wordcloud of keywords
associated with ECLC.
C. ECLC SYSTEM AND SECURITY MODEL
ECLC can be useful for emerging technologies in the IoT
paradigm such as in RFID, WSN, e-Health, Smart Grid, and
others. It differentiates from ECC mainly in the fact that
ECLC realizations must exhibit awareness of the application
constraints and accommodate such requirements accordingly.
Such constraints can be grouped broadly as performance,
size, energy, and security. ECLC is similar to ECC in that
the former ought to preserve the same security features as the
latter, and thus it can be used for implementing comparable
security services.
The cryptographic strength of both, ECC and ECLC, relies
on the hardness of the discrete logarithm problem. This no-
tion, paired with security protocols can be used for providing
services of key establishment, encryption, authentication, and
signatures. These security solutions can then be implemented
in constrained environments as the aforementioned for appli-
cations in healthcare, military, rescue, security, among others.
Figure 2 illustrates the use of ECLC for providing key
agreement using WSN as case study. We would like to remark
FIGURE 2. Use of ECLC for providing key establishment in the context of
WSN: (A) System model. (B) Security model.
that this is just an instance of the many technologies that can
beneﬁt from its advantages. In a classical WSN model, sensor
nodes are distributed in environments of difﬁcult reach; the
information harvested by these nodes is collected by a base
station with internet connection and the end users obtain
information from the base station through the internet. A
characteristic of sensor nodes is that they suffer from critical
constraints in regards to performance, size, and energy. In
order to achieve secure communications in a wide-area, the
nodes must be able to establish multi-hop links. ECLC can
enable the nodes to link up with each other with low process-
ing and storage costs. In this example from Figure 2, a basic
ECDH-like protocol is described; in an ECLC solution, the
protocols, algorithms, and realizations must be aware of the
nodes constraints.
Any ECLC solutions ought to be as secure as its ECC
counterparts. The hardness of ECLC still relies on the dif-
ﬁculty of ﬁnding discrete logarithms over elliptic curve
groups. The order of the group will be directly related with
the security of the solution, as well as with the complexity of
evaluating the group operations. Improving the performance,
the size, or the energy consumption of an ECLC realization
should not compromise the security of the system. Therefore
the underlying ﬁeld size should be deﬁned according to
recommended ECC security levels [3].
Under certain scenarios, however, the designer might de-
termine that the information being protected does not require
long term security. One particular example are WSNs which,
by deﬁnition, are only meant to last from a few weeks to
months. In this instance, using an elliptic curve group which
VOLUME 4, 2016 3


===== PAGE 4 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
guarantees security for thousands of years might not be re-
quired. By using smaller ﬁelds performing group operations
becomes cheaper, as mentioned. Such idea has been explored
in [4]. Nonetheless, the impact of disclosing data which
on ﬁrst sight might appear innocuous is difﬁcult to assess:
undoubtedly, nowadays information has a high value.
ECC is a set of tools to provide security. To extend this
deﬁnition to lightweight cryptography, it follows that the
security is to be provided for constrained environments.
Then, we can understand lightweight cryptography as the
set of tools designed to provide security while observing the
application constraints. If these tools are based on elliptic
curve constructions, then
Deﬁnition 1: ECLC is the set of elliptic curve protocols,
domain parameters, algorithms, and implementation tech-
niques, tailored for providing security services under con-
strained environments.
ECLC is a novel concept. The attribute of lightweightness
has been vested upon ECC-based constructions in multi-
ple instances, as the survey evidences. Nonetheless, nobody
has sought to answer two fundamental questions: what is
lightweight in the context of ECC, and how to assess that an
ECC-based system is lightweight. For some, these questions
might appear trivial; however, reaching a common under-
standing and reference frame is a key point of science. Our in-
novation lies on exploring ECC in the context of lightweight
cryptography for providing answers for these questions.
D. PROBLEM STATEMENT
In this survey, for the ﬁrst time, we survey works which use
elliptic curve cryptography are denominated lightweight. In
a sense, this is a survey on ECC in the context of lightweight
cryptography. This is one of the main differences between
our work and previous ECC surveys.
Other signiﬁcant differentiations which can be made be-
tween our work and previous ECC surveys is the depth
and extension of our work. In this document we provide
preliminaries, a state of the art review, novel concepts, a
summary of strategies, and in general an extensive analysis
of the surveyed data, qualitatively and quantitatively.
The quick review of previously published ECC-related sur-
veys provided in Table 1 can highlight some of their general
limitations. It is possible to ﬁnd many more unpublished
works but most of them suffer from lack of scope, scientiﬁc
character, and extension. A particular exception is the work
in [5] where hardware realizations of ECC are covered with
sufﬁcient detail.
Our research aims at providing answers, in the broad sense,
for two main questions: What is lightweight in the context
of ECC? and how to determine if an ECC-based security
solution is lightweight?
From the discussion provided in this section we also
identify additional research questions which are, as far as we
know, yet open:
• If there are elliptic curves designed to ﬁt the needs of
constrained devices, is it possible to call such curves
TABLE 1. Brief summary of some published ECC-related surveys.
Y
ear Work Ref. Scope Pages References
2006 Dormale
and
Quisquater [6] High speed/
Hardware 13 80
2011 Kalra and Sood [7] Introductory/
Security 5 25
2014 Sakharkar et al. [8] Routing/
Security 5 17
2017 Harkanson
and Kim [9] Introductory/
Applications 7 30
lightweight?
• Is the “lightweight” adjective exclusive for the imple-
mentation of these systems?
• If the underlying ECC constructions are not standard-
ized, will there be any traction on implementing them?
• What are the strategies used in the design and imple-
mentation of lightweight security solutions based on
ECC?
The knowledge derived by answering the above questions
can serve to build novel lightweight security solutions for IoT
and related applications.
E. CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE SURVEY
This work has ﬁve main contributions:
1) Surveys, for the ﬁrst time, ECC in the context of
lightweight cryptography.
2) Quantiﬁes the State of the Art bounds for ECC-based
systems which are denominated lightweight.
3) Determines the criteria for ECC-based systems to be
denominated lightweight.
4) Proposes a design methodology that guides the realiza-
tion of ECLC solutions.
5) All the tables and graphs data are available in a public
repository1 as well as in IEEE DataPort.2
F . HOW TO READ THIS SURVEY
Our survey ﬁrst provides introductory notions so that re-
searchers which are ﬁrst approaching the topic of ECC can
ﬁnds some pointers on mathematical fundamentals, sug-
gested literature, and in general concepts and applications
of ECC; these are included in Section II. Readers well
versed on ECC from a general point of view can skip these
preliminaries.
The data collection techniques, our categories for classify-
ing the papers, and the data extracted from the different works
are reported in Section III. In this part we go in great detail
to describe the surveyed data since some of these concepts
require being clearly delimited.
The main body of the survey is presented in Section IV.
In this part the reader can ﬁnd tables which summarize char-
acteristics and quantiﬁable results from the different works.
The section is divided in three categories which include
in broad terms: protocols, algorithms, and implementations
1https://www.tamps.cinvestav.mx/~datasets/
2http://dx.doi.org/10.21227/bqfj-6c39
4 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 5 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
(software/hardware). For each category we provide a dis-
cussion and identify strategies used in the literature. The
qualitative analysis of the papers is expanded in Section V
where we provide our views on each of the different papers
as a whole, aiming at assessing if they do in fact belong to
ECLC.
Qualitative analysis of the surveyed papers can be found
in Section VI. This section is rich with resources for studying
the surveyed papers using different analysis approaches. This
part of the document requires that the reader has followed the
previous three sections since the labeling of the data might be
confusing otherwise.
Sections VII, VIII, and IX, provide insights on the char-
acteristics of the topic surveyed, in regards to applications,
strategies, trends, and open problems. Lastly, Section X con-
cludes the work with a summary of our ﬁndings. If the reader
is interested in our ﬁndings, beyond the detailed survey and
analysis of the papers, or in the answers we provide for the
research questions enumerated they can go directly to these
last sections.
II. ELLIPTIC CURVES AND CRYPTOGRAPHY
The security of PKC systems relies on mathematical prin-
ciples denominated one-way functions. These relations have
two main characteristics: ﬁrst that knowing all the input
variables it is easy to solve for the result, second that if
the result and only some input variables are known it is
difﬁcult to solve for the missing inputs. Only a handful of
these problems are known and used in cryptography, the most
popular ones being the integer factorization problem and the
discrete logarithm problem. The latter is of particular interest
to us since the security of most ECC systems depends on it.
A. BASIS
All modern PKC constructions rely on group’s theory in or-
der to guarantee the security of the systems. In the following
we provide some deﬁnitions useful to frame the concepts
around ECC that are used in the literature review.
Deﬁnition 2: A group is a set of elements G equipped
with a binary operation f : G × G → G such that f is
associative with an identity element e and every element in
G has an inverse. G is said to be abelian if and only if f is
commutative.
Let “f ” be called the group operation. In practical realiza-
tions, groups can be additive (if f represents an addition of
elements) or multiplicative (iff represents a multiplication).
Independently of the group realization, usually the notation is
multiplicative. That is, the group operation is denoted by ’*’,
the identity element in G is ’1’, and the inverse for any a in
G isa−1. The consecutive application of the group operation
n times over a group elementp is usually represented aspn.
It is important to determine the cardinality of any group
used in cryptography since the difﬁculty of any mathematical
problem deﬁned over such groups is associated with the
number of elements in the group.
Deﬁnition 3: The group is ﬁnite if and only ifG is a ﬁnite set,
in which case the number of elements inG, its cardinality, is
called the order ofG.
However, by using the totality of the elements in a group
can reduce the complexity, at the same time, if we know that
all the elements are valid.
A subgroupH ofG is a subset of G, which contains e, if
and only if f : H ×H → H holds for every element in H
and the inverse of such elements is also inH: for anyp ∈G,
the production q = pn for any n ∈ Z is a subgroup of G
generated byp, denoted as ⟨p⟩.
By knowing the group generator, a wide set of elements
can be speciﬁed with a single root element, instead of enu-
merating all the contents in the set.
Deﬁnition 4: The generator, root, or primitive element of G
is anyr ∈G such that ⟨r⟩ =G.
Cyclic groups are a particular instance of groups useful
for cryptographic applications since the results of any group
operation is also in the group, hence it is not needed to verify
the result and the calculations ought not need to be repeated.
Deﬁnition 5: If exists anr ∈G such that ⟨r⟩ =G, thenG is
said to be cyclic. The subgroups found in a cyclic group are
also cyclic.
If a generator is known, and it is used to represent a
subgroup of G, the cardinality of this subgroup is also an
interesting property to know. The number of elements in a
subgroup created by a generator is known as the generator
order.
Deﬁnition 6: An element p ∈ G has ﬁnite order if and only
if ⟨p⟩ is ﬁnite. The order ofp is the cardinality of ⟨p⟩ and is
given by the smallest t ∈ Z such that pt = e. This is also
called the generator order for ⟨p⟩.
Groups are deﬁned for a single group operation. The alge-
braic structure which uses both an additive and multiplicative
composition laws is called a ring.
Deﬁnition 7: A set of elementsR with two binary operations
{f,g } is a ring if and only if R is a commutative group with
f, andg is associative and distributive overf. In this case f
andg represent additive and multiplicative group operations
with 0 and 1 as identity element, respectively.
Deﬁnition 8: If a ringR is commutative and all of its nonzero
elements are invertible it is said thatR is a ﬁeld.
In order for all the elements in a ﬁeld to have an inverse, it
must be deﬁned by either0 or a prime.
Deﬁnition 9: If the order of a ﬁeldK is ﬁnite, then it is said
to be a ﬁnite ﬁeld.
In Elliptic Curve Cryptography the elliptic curves are
always deﬁned over ﬁnite ﬁelds. The order of the ﬁnite ﬁeld
K is given by pm, where p is a prime and m is the ﬁnite
dimension of the vector space in K. Finite ﬁelds are also
known as Galois ﬁelds, denoted by GF(pm).
Deﬁnition 10: For any prime p and any positive integer m
there exists a ﬁnite ﬁeld withq = pm elements denoted by
Fq.
A ﬁnite ﬁeld of orderq (Fq) exists if and only if its order
is a prime power q = pm. The most common constructions
VOLUME 4, 2016 5


===== PAGE 6 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0 20 40 60 80 100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
FIGURE 3. Points in the curve y2 = x3− 7x + 10∈ Fq with q = 19 (left) and q = 97 (right). Note that, for every x, there are at most two points.
include the cases where q = p (denoted prime ﬁeld Fp) and
whereq = 2 m (denoted binary ﬁeldF2m). These are the basis
for deﬁning the most popular elliptic curve systems.
For further details on groups and ﬁelds theory the reader
might consult [10], Chapter 2.
B. ELLIPTIC CURVES
Following the deﬁnition in (1), Fig. 3 shows two elliptic curve
groups E(Fq) whereq = 19 andq = 97.
All these tuples denoted as E(Fq) are called points with
x andy referred as coordinates [11]. The set E(Fq) together
with a point at inﬁnity O form a group. The group operation
is the addition law, which can be performed through arith-
metic operations in Fq according to well deﬁned formulae
[11]. With this addition rule, the set of points E(Fq) forms
an abelian group with O serving as the identity element.
Cyclic subgroups of such elliptic curve groups can be used
to implement cryptographic systems.
Properties
The order of an elliptic curve group {E(Fq) ∪ O}, denoted
by o, is the number of points in E. The values of o and q
are related by the Frobenius trace t = q + 1 −o. Hasse’s
theorem implies that |t| ≤ 2√
q. Given a point P ∈ E(Fq)
its order is the smallest positive integer n such that nP =
O. By Lagrange’s theorem, the order of a point P ∈ E(Fq)
divides the ordero of the groupE(Fq). ThusoP = O for any
P ∈E(Fq) and, consequently, the order of a point is always
less than or equal to the order of the elliptic curve.
Arithmetic
Different types of computations are involved in ECC. These
are of diverse nature, depending if they are deﬁned for the
elliptic curve, for the elliptic curve group, or for the ﬁnite
ﬁeld.
a) Curve arithmetic
In the case of curve operations the inputs are points in the
elliptic curve, which are used to ﬁnd other points in the
elliptic curve. A single calculation belongs to this set, the
scalar multiplication. This is the embodiment of the group
law: the application of successive group operations (addition)
to a point P ∈ E(Fq) will generate as a result other points
also in the curve. If the number of additions applied to the
point equals the order of the elliptic curve group, the result is
the original point.
Scalar multiplication in the curve E(Fq) means calculating
k additions of a point P and is represented by kP . In this
process, a scalar k ∈ N and a curve point P ∈ E(Fq)
are used to ﬁnd a different point Q ∈ E(Fq) such that
Q =kP through a deﬁned set of rules. Multiple methods for
performing scalar multiplication have been proposed, among
them: double and add, NAF, Montgomery ladder, to mention
a few [12]. All these methods are built on group operations,
which are deﬁned for a speciﬁc elliptic curve.
b) Group arithmetic
This type of arithmetic comprises the realization of the ellip-
tic curve point addition. It is independent of kP algorithms
and varies depending on the curve type, ﬁnite ﬁeld and
coordinates type being used. The addition of two points in
the elliptic curve
P +Q ∀ P,Q ∈E(Fq) (2)
and point doubling
P +P ∀ P ∈E(Fq) (3)
are the staples of group operations. A scalar multiplication
generally uses both these calculations and thus ﬁnding efﬁ-
cient formulae3 for group operations is critical.
3Efﬁciency is often measured in quantity, diversity, and quality of the
underlying ﬁeld arithmetic.
6 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 7 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
FIGURE
4. Operations in ECC divided by levels.
c) Field arithmetic
The ﬁeld operations are those deﬁned forFq. The point addi-
tion and doubling are performed as a sequence of operations
over different coordinates from the input points, these coordi-
nates are ﬁeld elements. The ﬁeld arithmetic is linked and not
dependent with the curve arithmetic or the group operations.
Different conﬁgurations of ﬁeld operations perform group
calculations. The most common of these procedures include
ﬁeld multiplication, polynomial reduction, ﬁeld addition and
subtraction, ﬁeld squaring and ﬁeld inversion, to mention a
few.
Fig. 4 summarizes the different levels of operations in
ECC.
Point representation
A pointP ∈E(Fq) can have different representations which
satisfy equivalent models of the Weierstrass equation. Math-
ematical transformations are applied to each point in order
to generate a projection of the curve. These transformation
functions must be bijective. The main reason to perform a
coordinate transformation over a point is to achieve simpliﬁ-
cations for performing curve operations.
The basic system of point representation is afﬁne. Under
this system each point P ∈ E(Fq) is represented by a coor-
dinates pair, generally (x,y ). Only two values are required to
represent a point and, in some cases, a single coordinate is
sufﬁcient. The main drawback is that in the computation of
the group operation, multiple ﬁeld inversions are required to
retrieve a result in afﬁne coordinates. Inversions are resource
intensive operations in Fq so they should be avoided in
constrained environments.
Projective coordinates are used to solve this problem. A
projective point P ∈ E(Fq) is denoted by a coordinate’s
tuple (X : Y : Z). The transformation from afﬁne to
projective coordinates generally follows x = X/Z and
y = Y/Z . In this case the result can be obtained without
any inversion operation. An additional value is required to
represent a curve point (for theZ coordinate).
Mixed coordinates is a term used to refer to those systems
which perform group operations with mixed point represen-
tations. In most of the cases, point addition takes an input
Elliptic CurvePrime fields Binary fields
Random
Koblitz Montgomery
Edwards
Twisted Edwards
MoTE
Random
Koblitz
Edwards
Hessian
FIGURE
5. Families of elliptic curves deﬁned over prime and binary ﬁelds.
Each family has a corresponding curve model which represents its curves.
in afﬁne coordinates but delivers the output in projective
coordinates to avoid using ﬁeld inversions. Point doubling, on
the other hand, can use projective inputs to produce projective
outputs with low cost. Such systems require a single coordi-
nate transformation at the end of each scalar multiplication
thus improving the efﬁciency of the calculations.
A special point representation denominatedw-coordinates
was proposed in [13]. In this system a curve point is rep-
resented by a single coordinate (w). The equivalence of
these coordinates with the afﬁne system is usually w =
x + y. However, as it is the case with afﬁne coordinates,
performing curve operations in w systems involve multiple
ﬁeld inversions. The projective version of these coordinates
corresponds with the relation w = W/Z and works in the
same way as projective coordinates to reduce the need for
ﬁeld inversions. These are called projective-w coordinates.
The main reasons for using these special coordinates are
to reduce storage requirements and to improve operations
efﬁciency. Depending on the nature ofw =f (x,y ), the point
addition can be tweaked in order to reduce the number of
ﬁeld operations required. Mixed systems of w coordinates
can also be constructed. The use of such coordinates reduces
the storage space and the number of ﬁeld operations required,
also eliminating the need for ﬁeld inversions. The main
drawback for the w coordinates is that converting the points
back to the afﬁne domain involves the half trace function
[13], which is costly.
Elliptic curve families
The generalized form of an elliptic curve can be reduced
or simpliﬁed to identify particular sets of curves known as
families. Fig. 5 presents the taxonomy of the different elliptic
curve families. The most relevant ones are described below.
Deﬁnition 11: For elliptic curves deﬁned over a ﬁeldFq with
q =pm andm = 1 the Weierstrass equation is simpliﬁed as
Ep :y2 =x3 +ax +b (4)
witha,b ∈ Fp and 4a3 + 27b2 ̸= 0.
VOLUME 4, 2016 7


===== PAGE 8 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
These curves are generally denominated prime curves and
the model that deﬁnes them is referred as reduced Weierstrass
equation.
Deﬁnition 12: Nonsupersingular elliptic curves over a ﬁnite
ﬁeldFq withq =pm andp = 2 are deﬁned by
Eb :y2 +xy =x3 +ax2 +b (5)
witha,b ∈ F2m.
This is the so called set of binary elliptic curves.
Other notable families of curves include Montgomery
curves, Koblitz curves, Edwards curves, and the novel MoTE
curves [14].
Deﬁnition 13: A Montgomery curve is a form of elliptic curve
deﬁned overFq, with characteristic different of 2, by
EM :By 2 =x3 +Ax2 +x (6)
withA ∈ Fq \ {−2, 2},B ∈ Fq \ {0} andB(A2 − 4) ̸= 0.
Introduced by Peter L. Montgomery in 1987, these curves
are used in cryptographic applications. The major attraction
of these curves is the possibility to perform point arithmetic
with thex coordinate only [15].
Koblitz curves, also known as anomalous binary curves,
were proposed by Neal Koblitz for cryptographic use in 1992
[16]. Compared to random binary curves, point multiplica-
tions methods which are signiﬁcantly faster are available.
Deﬁnition 14: Koblitz curves satisfy an equation of the form
EK :y2 +xy =x3 +ax2 + 1 (7)
witha ∈ F2.
The family of Edwards Elliptic Curves is deﬁned as fol-
lows.
Deﬁnition 15: Let Fq be a ﬁeld in which 2 ̸= 0 and let d ∈
Fq \ {0, 1}; then
EE :x2 +y2 = 1 +dx2y2 (8)
deﬁnes an Edwards curve [16].
Computing scalar multiples in these curves takes fewer
ﬁeld operations than in other representations. Additionally,
the formulas for addition on Edwards’s curves can provide
protection against simple side-channel attacks [16].
Deﬁnition 16: A variation of these curves called twisted
Edwards curves satisﬁes that
ET =a2 +y2 = 1 +dx2y2 (9)
witha,d ∈ Fq \ {0} anda ̸=d.
A MoTE curve can be described as an elliptic curve which
has the Montgomery model as well as twisted Edwards model
[15].
Deﬁnition 17: The Montgomery model of a MoTE curve is
given by an equation as
EM : −(A + 2)y2 =x3 +Ax2 +x, (10)
which means the parameterB = −(A + 2). The birationally-
equivalent twisted Edwards model of the above MoTE curve
is given by
ET : −x2 +y2 = 1 + 2 −A
2 +Ax2y2, (11)
C. THE DISCRETE LOGARITHM PROBLEM
A discrete logarithm is an integer k solving bk = g, where
b andg are elements of a ﬁnite group. This construction was
used to propose one-way functions utilized as the basis for
asymmetric cryptography [17].
In order for a system based on discrete logarithms to be
efﬁcient, fast algorithms for computing the group operation
must be available. For security, the discrete logarithm prob-
lem should be computationally intractable [12].
The most popular groups for implementing discrete loga-
rithm systems are the cyclic subgroups of the multiplicative
group of a ﬁnite ﬁeld, and cyclic subgroups of elliptic curve
groups.
Deﬁnition 18: Discrete Logarithm Problem over Elliptic
Curves. LetE be an elliptic curve deﬁned over a ﬁnite ﬁeld
Fq. Let P be a point in E(Fq), and suppose that P has a
prime ordern. Then, the cyclic subgroup ofE(Fq) generated
byP is
⟨P ⟩ = {O,P, 2 ·P, 3 ·P,..., (n − 1) ·P }. (12)
For these systems the group operation · is the consecutive
addition of elliptic curve points or scalar multiplication.
Given a point
Q =k ·P ∈ ⟨P ⟩ (13)
and the root element or generator P , ﬁndingk is called the
Discrete Logarithm Problem over Elliptic Curves (ECDLP)
and is computationally intractable [12].
The DLP is of practical use in asymmetric cryptography
since it is the basis for the key pair system. In the case
of ECC, the prime q, the equation of the elliptic curve E,
the point P , and its order n are public domain parameters.
A private key is an integer k that is selected uniformly at
random from the interval [1,n − 1] and the corresponding
public key is
Q =k ·P. (14)
D. ELLIPTIC CURVE CRYPTOGRAPHY
Elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) was discovered in 1985
by Neal Koblitz and Victor Miller. ECC schemes are public-
key mechanisms used in cryptographic protocols in order
to provide speciﬁc security services. The security the sys-
tems based on elliptic curves relies on the hardness of the
ECDLP [12]. Currently the best algorithms known to solve
this problem have fully exponential running time, in contrast
to the subexponential-time algorithms known for the integer
factorization problem. This difference is what creates the
main advantage for ECC over other public key alternatives:
smaller key sizes are sufﬁcient to achieve an equivalent
security level.
Domain parameters
The domain parameters for an elliptic curve scheme are the
necessary elements to describe an elliptic curve group. These
include the elliptic curve E, a ﬁnite ﬁeld Fq, a base point
P ∈ E(Fq), and its order n [12]. The parameters should
8 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 9 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
A B
PA = a·P
PB = b·P
PA
PB
PK=a·PB PK=b·PA
a      [1,n-1]$ b      [1,n-1]$
FIGURE 6. Interaction diagram for the basic ECDH protocol. In this scheme
the parameters Fq, E(Fq), and P are publicly known.
be chosen according to application constraints. Typically, do-
main parameters are shared by a group of entities; however,
in some applications they may be speciﬁc to each user.
Domain parametersD = (Fq,E,P,n) are comprised of:
1) The ﬁnite ﬁeld Fq.
2) The coefﬁcients that deﬁne the equation of the elliptic
curveE over Fq.
3) Two ﬁeld elements xP andyP in Fq that deﬁne a base
pointP = (x P,y P ) ∈E(Fq) in afﬁne coordinates.P
has prime order and is called the base point, primitive
root, or ⟨P ⟩ =E(Fq).
4) The order n ofP .
Key establishment
The purpose of a key establishment protocol is to provide
two or more entities communicating over an open network
with a shared secret key. The key may then be used in a
symmetric-key protocol to achieve some cryptographic goal
such as conﬁdentiality or data integrity [12].
Elliptic Curve Difﬁe-Hellman (ECDH): Suppose two
parties A and B want to establish a shared key. Let A and
B agree on the common domain parameters D.A randomly
choosesa ∈ [1,n − 1] and computes PA = a ·P whileB
follows the same procedure and obtainsPB =b ·P .A andB
publicly exchange these intermediate results. If the ECDLP
is hard in E(Fq),a orb cannot be computed given {PA,P }
or {PB,P }, respectively. Upon receivingPB,A computes
PK =a ·PB = (a ×b) ·P. (15)
NowB can obtain the same result as
PK =b ·PA = (b ×a) ·P, (16)
thus they are both in possession of a group element PK,
becoming the shared key, which should not be computable
from the public values PA andPB. The interaction diagram
for the basic ECDH protocol is illustrated in Fig. 6.
The security of ECDH relies on the ECDLP. As a pro-
tocol, the problems an attacker must solve are the Difﬁe-
Hellman computational problem or the Difﬁe-Hellman de-
cisional problem.
• Computational Difﬁe-Hellman problem: Computing
abP givenaP andbP .
• Decisional Difﬁe-Hellman problem: GivenaP,bP and
cP to decide whethercP =abP .
Data encryption
In public-key encryption systems each entity A has a public
key PA and a corresponding private key a. In secure sys-
tems, the task of computing a givenPA is computationally
intractable. The public key deﬁnes an encryption transfor-
mationEPA, whereas the private key deﬁnes the associated
decryption transformationDa. Any entityB wishing to send
a message m to A obtains an authentic copy of A’s public
key PA, uses the encryption transformation to obtain the
ciphertext
c =EPA (m), (17)
and sends c to A. To decrypt c, A applies the decryption
transformation to obtain the original message
m =Da(c), (18)
as described in [18].
EC-ElGamal: In order to establish a secure communica-
tions channel,B creates a key pair {b,P B} as
PB =b ·P (19)
whereb ∈ [1,n −1] and publishesPB while keepingb secret.
To transmit a message m to B it must ﬁrst be mapped to a
point in the curve as
Pm ←m. (20)
User A chooses a random integer a and sends the pair of
points {PA,P E} where
PA =a ·P (21)
and
PE =Pm +a ·PB. (22)
To read the message, B multiplies the ﬁrst point in the pair
by his secret as
b ·PA = (b ×a) ·P, (23)
and then subtracts the results from the second point in the
pair as
PE −b ·PA =Pm +a ·PB −b ·PA =
Pm + (a ×b) ·P − (b ×a) ·P =Pm (24)
as shown in [19]. Fig. 7 provides an interaction diagram for
the EC-ElGamal cryptosystem.
The Elliptic Curve Integrated Encryption Scheme
(ECIES): ECIES was proposed by Bellare and Rogaway,
and is a variant of the ElGamal public-key encryption scheme
[12]. In ECIES, a secretPK obtained using ECDH is used to
derive two symmetric keysk1 andk2 with a Key Derivation
Function (KDF). The key k1 is used to encrypt the message
using a symmetric-key cipher, with encryption (E) and de-
cryption (D) functions, whereas the keyk2 is used to authen-
ticate the resulting ciphertext using a Message Authentication
Code (MAC) function. The interaction diagram for ECIES is
shown in Fig. 8.
VOLUME 4, 2016 9


===== PAGE 10 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
A B
a     [1,n-1]
PA=a·P PB=b·P
PE=Pm+a·PB
PA, PE PK=b·PA
mPm
Pm=PE-PK
m Pm
$ b     [1,n-1]$
FIGURE 7. Interaction diagram for the EC-ElGamal cryptosystem. In this
scheme the parameters Fq, E(Fq), P and the mapping m→ Pm are publicly
known. The receiver of information must disclose its public key.
A B
k1,k2=KDF(PK)
c=Ek1(m)
t=MACk2(c)
t, c
k1,k2=KDF(PK)
t'=MACk2(c)
t'≡t
m=Dk1(c)
FIGURE 8. Interaction diagram for the ECIES cryptosystem. In this case PK
represents a shared secret generated using the ECDH algorithm, and is used
to generate two secret keys with a key derivation function (KDF). The
operations E and D are the encryption and decryption functions for a
symmetric cipher. m, c, and t represent the plain message, the encrypted
message and a MAC tag, respectively.
Digital signatures
A digital signature of a message is a code dependent on the
signers private key and the message being signed. Signatures
must be veriﬁable; if a dispute arises as to whether a party
signed a document, an unbiased third party should be able to
resolve the matter using the public key of the signer [18].
ECDSA: With a private key a and a public key PA, to
generate a signature for the message m,A selects a random
k ∈ [1,n − 1], computes
k ·P = (x1,y 1). (25)
ThenA computes
r =x1 modn (26)
and if the result is zero, a different k must be selected. Next,
A calculates
e = H(m) (27)
and
s =k−1(e +a ×r) modn, (28)
where H denotes a cryptographic hash function. If s = 0 the
process must be restarted. The signature for the message m
is the pair (r,s ). Fig. 9 provides an interaction diagram for
this signature scheme.
To verify the signature generated by A, userB must have
an authenticated copy of PA. First, B veriﬁes thatr and s
A B
a     [1,n-1]
PA = a·P
r
, s, m
k     [1,n-1]
x1,y1 = k·P
r = x1 mod n
e = H(m)
s = k-1(e+a×r)
e = H(m)
w = s-1 mod n
u1 = e×w mod n
u2 = r×w mod n
x2,y2 = u1·P+u2·PA
v = x2 mod n 
v  r
$
$
FIGURE 9. Interaction diagram for the ECDSA scheme. The message to be
signed is represented by m and the signature itself is represented by (r, s).
ECC
Key establishment
Encryption
Signatures
ECDH
ECMQV
ECIES
EC-ElGamal
PSEC
ECDSA
EC-KDSA
FIGURE 10. Classiﬁcation of different Elliptic Curve based security schemes.
are valid integers, if any veriﬁcation fails the signature is
rejected. After the veriﬁcation,B computes
e =H(m) and w =s−1 modn. (29)
Next,B calculates
u1 =e ×w modn and u2 =r ×w modn. (30)
ThenB computes
X =u1 ·P +u2 ·PA = (x2,y 2). (31)
IfX = O the signature is rejected. FinallyB computes
v =x2 modn. (32)
The signature is accepted if and only ifv =r.
Fig. 10 presents a classiﬁcation of the reviewed cryptosys-
tems. Some derived algorithms that were not mentioned in
this review are also included in the classiﬁcation for com-
pleteness, these can be looked up in [12].
10 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 11 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
E. ECC AND OTHER PKC SOLUTIONS
As reviewed in the previous examples, the most important se-
curity services provided by ECC include key establishment,
conﬁdentiality, integrity, and authentication. However, ECC
is not the only cryptographic solution for these tasks.
Before ECC gained widespread attention, systems which
relied on integer factoring and discrete logarithms over mul-
tiplicative groups were used as PKC instances. Perhaps the
most popular from these is RSA, proposed in 1977 for
creating encryption and digital signature methods. Nowadays
this scheme is still supported and used by many internet
servers. Due to breakthroughs on algorithms for solving its
underlying hard problem, the length of RSA’s operands has
increased to 3072-bits for a security level of 128-bits. In
comparison, ECC only requires operands of 256-bits for the
same security level. This difference of an order of magnitude
is a signiﬁcant advantage for ECC as shorter operands imply
shorter computing times and smaller storage requirements.
Garbled circuits [20] are a classical instance of a crypto-
graphic approach for achieving secure two-party computa-
tion. These constructions were ﬁrst described in 1986 and
have been called “the ﬁrst secure computation protocol.”
Their main application is enabling two mistrusting parties to
achieve a secure function evaluation (SFE) while providing
privacy, authentication, and obliviousness [21]. These pro-
tocols rely on a primitive called oblivious transfer which is
difﬁcult to achieve; classical proposals relied on RSA for this
regard. The use of these constructions in constrained environ-
ments is limited by performance and storage issues that have
not been properly addressed. Moreover, the proposals in the
literature have limited the study of the security of garbled
circuits to reduced adversarial models (semi-honest) and of-
ten rely on symmetric primitives which represent additional
costs.
A notion which was considered almost from the beginning
(one year after RSA), but believed to be inapplicable for
many years is homomorphic encryption (HE) [22]. Under
this scheme it is possible to perform computations on a ci-
phertext, without requiring decrypting the data. This implies
that an entity applying some processing over conﬁdential
information does not require disclosure of such secrets. Al-
though partial homomorphism was possible using many clas-
sical cryptosystems, among them RSA, fully homomorphic
encryption (FHE) was created with the development of lattice
based cryptography. Both learning with errors (LWE) and
NTRU have been used to create homomorphic encryption
schemes [23], [24]. The main application of FHE is to allow
an untrusted party to carry computations over a protected
secret without granting it access to the data, this represents
an extension of the notion of privacy.
Beyond the scope of HE, lattice-related problems (SIS,
LWE, RLWE, MLWE, LWR, MLWR) have been employed
for creating PKC solutions [25]. The main advantage of
lattice-based cryptosystems include strong provable security
guarantees, ﬂexibility, and high asymptotic efﬁciency [26].
Although lattice-based systems can perform encryption and
decryption operations with relative efﬁciency, their key sizes
are much larger than those of RSA or ECC, which makes
their use impractical for constrained devices.
When the underlying one-way function used in a cryp-
tographic construction uses an error correcting code, such
a solution is denominated a code-based cryptosystem [27].
The McEliece public key encryption scheme, proposed in
1978, is acknowledged to be the ﬁrst of these systems. The
main feature of code-based systems is their security—the
McEliece cryptosystem remains secure nowadays with just
minor tweaks. Their main downside is the size of their key
pairs, larger than even those used in lattice instances. Both
lattice and code solutions are believed to resists quantum
attack models and so, although not as efﬁcient as ECC, are of
interest for the research community. The study of the impact
of quantum computers on PKC, as well as the discussion on
the advances in the development of quantum computers are
outside the scope of this work.
Systems based on elliptic curve groups achieve greater ef-
ﬁciency and ﬂexibility than the aforementioned alternatives.
They have been adopted in a wide range of applications, and
in some cases under critical constraints. ECC is the most
popular of such systems, but in the literature it is possible to
ﬁnd different alternatives which extend its security features.
Bilinear pairings over elliptic curve groups have been
used to construct cryptographic schemes which make use the
user’s identity [28]. Identity based encryption (IBE) [29] is
perhaps the most notorious of such proposals. Under this
model, the public key of a user is a random string which
can provide some meaningful information associated with
the identity of the user: name, address, email. The secret
keys are distributed to each user by a trusted third party in
a secure way. The main advantage of these constructions
is the ease in the management and distribution of public
keys. Although this ﬁeld has great potential in consumer
appliances, as described in [28] “[i]t makes the cryptographic
aspects of the communication almost transparent to the user”,
for constrained devices the increased complexity obfuscates
its advantages.
Attribute based encryption (ABE) [30] is a modiﬁcation
of the identity-based systems on that the “identity” is “a set
of descriptive attributes.” The security of ABE also relies
on bilinear pairings deﬁned over elliptic curve groups. This
scheme can be used in structured multi-party environments
where a single policy can provide distinct access levels based
on each party’s attributes. Efﬁciency concerns also restrict
the use of ABE solutions in constrained environments.
Although the research on pairing based cryptography is
still novel, in the literature we can ﬁnd some instances of such
systems in the context of lightweight cryptography [31]–[34].
Such works are not included in this survey since the study
of lightweight pairings is not our main focus. Nonetheless,
since elliptic curves are an essential part in pairing based
cryptography (IBE, ABE,...), ECLC would also impact the
realization of such systems and possibly will enable their
practical use in IoT domains.
VOLUME 4, 2016 11


===== PAGE 12 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
F . SUMMARY
Up to this point we have reviewed concepts which are
important in understanding the survey. Fig. 11 provides a
diagram which summarizes the relations between some of the
different topics reviewed.
III. METHODS
This section describes the methodology for the literature
review, the classiﬁcation categories, and the surveyed data.
The labels introduced in this section are used throughout the
rest of the document for identifying the surveyed data.
A. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
This review was conducted over papers retrieved from four
electronic collections: IEEE Xplore, Springer Link, ACM
Digital Library, and Science Direct. The terms “lightweight
ECC”, “lightweight elliptic curves”, “low-area ECC”, and
“low-power ECC” were used to search for the related works.
Given the scope of this work, the analysis was fo-
cused on those papers where the authors use the adjective
“lightweight” to describe their proposal. The additional terms
included in the querying process allowed us to gather a wider
set of documents, which were then screened. The review was
updated up to September 2018.
In total 91 papers were obtained from the digital libraries
consulted. Using the criteria of being called “lightweight”
and using Elliptic Curve Cryptography this set was reduced
to 62 papers. All of these are considered in our qualitative
and quantitative analysis.
B. SURVEY CATEGORIES
The qualitative assessment of the surveyed papers is divided
in two parts. First we provide summaries of the surveyed data
in which the papers are grouped according to the categories
described in the following. In the second part we offer our
qualitative assessment of all the works as a set. The latter
represents an analysis on ECLC as a whole.
We use three categories for structuring the presentation of
the surveyed papers:
CAT1 Papers which propose elliptic-curve based lightweight
protocols.
CAT2 Papers which propose elliptic-curve based lightweight
algorithms for solving group operations.
CAT3 Papers which propose elliptic-curve based lightweight
realizations, divided in software, FPGA, and ASIC.
These categories allow us to focus the analysis and discus-
sion on reduced contexts. In this way we can provide general
strategies, metrics, and results for each case.
C. SURVEYED DATA
In the following we review the information that we sought to
extract from every paper and introduce labels for identifying
each ﬁeld.
A) Why is it considered lightweight?
In our review we found out that a variety of motivations
followed by authors to describe their works as “lightweight”
or use this keyword. However, an speciﬁc reasoning is rarely
made explicit. Six main motivations are identiﬁed:
[A1] New protocol: A protocol is presented to establish a
shared secret, to authenticate a node, or to sign a message. In
this case the objective is to reduce the number of operations
and thus to reduce the quantity of messages being sent.
[A2] Optimized implementation: With aims to implement
at the lowest possible cost the arithmetic in ECC that include:
scalar multiplication, point addition, point doubling, ﬁeld
operations. This category also covers software or hardware
implementations which make use of optimization techniques
such as highly optimized assembly and low level digital
design.
[A3] Modiﬁcation to ECC: Contributions in this category
present an alternative to generic ECC constructions aiming
at reducing resource consumption or improving its imple-
mentations performance in constrained devices. Examples of
this include modiﬁcations to the form of the underlying ﬁnite
ﬁeld, the elliptic curve family, the group algorithms, the point
representation, or the scalar representation.
[A4] ECC-based: Some works deﬁne their proposals as
lightweight just by using ECC instead of classical alternatives
like RSA. Whereas there is some truth to such afﬁrmation,
what we propose as lightweight involves more design and
implementation considerations which tailor the solution to
the application.
[A5] Tailored system: By replacing instances of asymmet-
ric primitives or RSA and its relatives on legacy systems with
ECC, some proposals claim to achieve lightweightness. This
can be considered similar to A4, however in this case more
design aspects are involved.
[A6] More lightweight than the SoTA: Some validation
is provided when a solution claims to be lightweight by re-
quiring less resources than some other work in the literature.
This does not say anything about the work used as reference,
however. If an ECC based system is implemented, and then
said to be lightweight from the results obtained but the design
aspect is missing, we assign it this classiﬁcation.
B) Abstraction levels of the work
Design abstraction levels can be observed in the development
of solutions for constrained environments. This idea was
originally proposed in [35], where the authors illustrate a
security pyramid which delimits four abstraction levels to
achieve a low-power implementation of ECC: System, Pro-
tocol and Algorithm, Architecture, and Circuit. This concept
can be extended to lightweight solutions which consider not
only power reduction, but area, performance, and security
as well. In this survey we propose ﬁve abstraction levels
which can be identiﬁed in the design of a lightweight security
solution. We have opted to separate the protocol and algo-
rithm levels since they differ substantially on the underlying
problems and the evaluation metrics used.
12 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 13 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
ECC
Design
Implementation
Protocols
Software
Hardware
Key establishment
Encryption
Signature
FPGA
ASIC
Transport
Agreement
ECIES
EC-ElGamal
PSEC
ECDSA
EC-KDSA
Group
Dynamic
Pre-distribution
ECDH
ECMQV
Domain parameters
Arithmetic
RepresentationField
Family Generator
Scalar multiplication
Point addition
Point doubling
Scalar
Point
FieldBinary
Prime
Irreducible polynomial
Arithmetic
Curve
Curve
Order
Affine
Jacobianw
Lambda
Mixed
Polynomial
Gaussian normal
Multiplication
Addition
Substraction
Reduction
Inversion
Squaring
Random
Koblitz
Edwards
Hessian
Random
Koblitz
Montgomery
Edwards
Twisted Edwards
MoTE
FIGURE
11. Summary of different concepts reviewed and their relations.
[B1] System: A contribution which considers technology-
speciﬁc optimizations to improve the quality of their proposal
(for example, optimizations which exploit the characteristics
of WSN) is considered to observe the System abstraction
level. By nature, all protocols are considered to be “system
aware”, as they are generally designed with the application
requirements in mind.
[B2] Protocol: A lightweight solution which seeks to pro-
vide security services in the scope of public key cryptog-
raphy (i.e., authentication, signature, key establishment) for
constrained environments (the System) ought to consider the
protocol design in aims to reduce the computational time and
the amount of information being transmitted over the wireless
channel. Works which propose optimizations concerning the
protocols being utilized are considered to meet the Protocol
abstraction level.
[B3] Algorithm: The security algorithms are closely asso-
ciated with the underlying elliptic curve group. If a proposal
aims to be adapted by constrained devices, it is expected that
it should make use of algorithms adapted for the applica-
tion (the System and the implementation technology). The
Algorithm abstraction level is met if the works fulﬁll this
requirement. Software implementations are also considered
in this category, since the optimizations focus on tailoring
the algorithms to a given processor architecture.
[B4] Architecture: Architectures which implement the pro-
posed algorithms efﬁciently in order to meet the application
constrains. The design of a digital circuit to perform compu-
tations (regardless of the implementation technology) entitles
a work with the Architecture abstraction level. Different
technologies exist which allow for implementing architec-
tures of digital circuits, the most common ones being FPGA
and ASIC. In the former a description of the architecture is
created and then mapped to an array of logic elements present
in the FPGA. Most of this process is done automatically by
vendor speciﬁc design tools and so implementations targeting
FPGA are said to meet only the Architecture abstraction
level.
[B5.] Circuit: ASIC design provides greater control over
the ﬁnal product and enables optimizations at circuit level
which can help improve the efﬁciency of a solution. Pro-
posals which use this implementation technology are said to
meet the Circuit abstraction level. Low-level FPGA design
also enables for circuit level optimizations, however these
processes are uncommon as FPGAs are generally used for
rapid development and testing. If a publication deals with
low-level FPGA design it can also be said to meet the Circuit
abstraction level characteristic.
C) Main goals of the work
We identiﬁed the main contributions of a paper based on
its design goals. Some proposals seek throughput improve-
ment, runtime reduction, or latency reduction. Other aim
at reducing physical area or memory usage. Some try to
improve security or reduce the amount of data transmitted.
By identifying a “main” goal, we do not say that a work
overlooks the other goals, but that they simply take extra
steps to improve a speciﬁc characteristic. The main aim(s)
VOLUME 4, 2016 13


===== PAGE 14 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
of a work can be:
[C1] Performance: To reduce the cycle count or the latency
of the proposal. This usually encompasses faster algorithms,
reduced number of operations, and reduced number of steps,
among others. This trait is commonly associated with metrics
such as throughput, latency, frequency, and runtime. The im-
plementation platform determines important characteristics
such as the frequency, which affects the throughput and the
runtime. A more technology-independent measurement is the
latency, which is the required number of cycles to perform a
task, usually clock cycles or processor cycles. The latency,
however, depends on the implementation strategy for the
algorithm.
[C2] Hardware resources: To reduce memory footprint of
a software implementation or elements count in the case of
hardware. The use of smaller ﬁelds generally falls in this
category, along with reducing the variety of the operations
and optimizing the circuit design for hardware implemen-
tations. For software oriented solutions the resource usage
usually translates into memory usage, which can be pro-
gram memory (code lines) or application memory (bits).
In regards to hardware implementations, most commonly
this is associated with the target platform. In the case of
FPGAs the resource usage can be given as a count of FPGA
elements utilized (slices, Look-up Tables, Flip-Flops, block
RAMs, multipliers (DSPs)). For ASIC the resource usage is
equivalent to the implementation size, which is commonly
given in gate equivalents (GE).
[C3] Security: To select a high security setting and then
part from it to build the lightweight solution. Mitigating a
wide range of attacks and improving the security features of
the system also falls in this category. Some of the reviewed
works measure the security of their proposals based on the
number of attacks resisted. Other approaches may consider
relating this with the key size utilized.
[C4] Bandwidth: To reduce the quantities of data transmit-
ted, which frees up the communications channel and saves
energy. In the design of protocols it is usually reported the
number of bits that are required to be transmitted. This can
also be related to the number of messages required to be
exchanged. Both inﬂuence in the bandwidth of the system
and the energy consumption of the platform.
[C5] Energy: Systems which have been designed in order
to reduce power dissipation or energy consumption. The
power dissipation is a key feature for passive elements such
as RFID tags, it can be divided in quiescent and dynamic
power. It has a direct relation with the physical size of the
device, the operational power and frequency, and the temper-
ature. Energy consumption is derived as a function of power
dissipation and execution time, it is important for battery-
powered devices, where a higher consumption impacts the
lifetime of the platform.
D) System
Lightweight solutions are required for different constrained
environments. Depending on the speciﬁc application, the
interests or goals of a paper might be shifted. For each work
we have assigned a “main” system that they target. The IoT
tends to the used as a cover-all alternative, but given its
heterogeneity and novelty little is known about its require-
ments. On contrast, RFID and WSN have clearly deﬁned
scopes and a handful implementation devices. Designing
for WSN or RFID, therefore, enables some works to take
more application-related trade-offs. Emerging technologies
are also represented withe-Health and Smart Grid, these are
well deﬁned but more recent. Embedded and mobile systems
are as well mentioned as target systems by some works.
These have been around for some time and include devices
with less energy/processing/cost restrictions than IoT and
similar.
[D1] IoT: The Internet of Things, an interconnected net-
work of heterogeneous applications which are expected to
change the world in the next 10 years.
[D2] RFID: Extremely constrained systems which operate
passively. Their cost is low and so have widespread use in
commercial application such as inventory monitoring.
[D3] WSN: Represent the link between the physical and
the cybernetic world. Information systems rely on informa-
tion, and this information can only be retrieved effectively
by sensors. The deployment costs and security concerns
have restricted their practical use to research and military
applications. Since these devices are actively consuming
energy and their retrieval after deployment is impractical,
open problems regarding extending battery duration, energy
harvesting, and preventing contamination of the environment
must be resolved.
[D4] e-Health: With a population that grows old many
countries must seek ways to automate healthcare systems.
We have grouped technologies such as WBANs and remote
monitoring of patients into this category. On this group the
applications are deeply connected to the user, and so ensuring
conﬁdentiality, privacy, and comfort are key aspects for any
such solution.
[D5] Smart Grid: Novel technology which proposes to
improve the electrical grid in order to improve its efﬁciency
and QoS.
[D6] Embedded systems: Denomination used to refer to
“everything on a board” systems. The deﬁnition says little
about its requirements. Embedded systems have been built
for decades and are a core technology for industrial automa-
tion processes.
[D7] Mobile systems: The physical embodiment of ubiq-
uity. Human society took the phone and turned it into a
network which enables sharing multimedia information in
real time, all the time, everywhere that there is coverage.
State of the art mobiles have higher speciﬁcations than many
desktop computers. However, the security requirements of
the former are enhanced given their wireless nature. A mobile
terminal must be protected against remote and direct access,
in the similar way of a WSN.
14 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 15 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
E) Implementation technology
Among the surveyed works a differentiation can be made
according to the implementation platform used. Whereas
some works have been developed with aims of achieving high
efﬁciency as software solutions for constrained processors
(usually with word sizes of 8-bit), others try to achieve high
efﬁciency through hardware circuitry reduction (as dedicated
coprocessors or stand-alone computing units). By choosing
the implementation target in an early stage of development,
some considerations can be made to further optimize the
system at the cost of a loss in its generality. By maintaining
generality, the cost is a loss in the improvement potential. The
set of papers can be divided in two broad groups: software
and hardware. The latter can then be divided between FPGA
and ASIC.
[E1] Processor: A deﬁned general-purpose architecture is
used to run a sequence of instructions or code. This code is
created in order to implement a speciﬁc processing task with
the help of memory spaces. The number of instructions in the
sequence and the amount of memory required are called tem-
poral and spatial complexity, respectively. Reducing these
complexities ﬁts within the algorithm abstraction level.
[E2] FPGA: A reconﬁgurable array of gates which can be
activated to create a speciﬁc datapath. This reconﬁguration
map is generally created by automated design tools based
on an RTL design, synthesized from an architectural descrip-
tion. The architectural description used to be created with a
Hardware Description Language (HDL), however, nowadays
High Level Synthesis tools are available which allow using
common languages like C in order to describe the desired
behavior. As the designer goes deeper in the design tree, the
optimization possibilities widen. In all the reviewed FPGA-
related works the proposals seem to use a HDL to describe
the architecture.
[E3] ASIC: The same RTL design used for FPGAs can
be compiled for ASIC libraries. An Application-Speciﬁc
Integrated Circuit (ASIC) is a chip manufactured with the
minimum number of transistors required to implement an
architecture. The area or physical size is reported in area
units (mm 2, µm2, nm2), this can be used to obtain an
estimation of the number of gates required for the circuit:
gate equivalents (GE). This metric is the most common
ASIC measurement given. It is commonly accepted that a GE
equals a 2-NAND in size.
F) Security level
We have retrieved details of the ﬁelds, groups and curves
utilized when available. However, the complete information
is generally not available and thus cannot be used to classify
the works with a high level of detail. It is understandable that
the information is often not available since generality and
optimization go hand in hand. A work with high generality
can function with a wider range of ﬁelds and curves. This
generality can be exchanged to achieve higher efﬁciency.
Most of the works do describe the ﬁeld length or the security
level, however. We have divided the different security levels
according to NIST recommendations for key usage:
[F1] Less than 112-bit: this is no longer recommended.
[F2] Equal to 112-bit: this is recommended until 2030.
[F3] Higher than 112-bit: which can provide security be-
yond 2030.
IV . SURVEYED WORKS
This section presents data gathered from the set of publica-
tions retrieved, which have been denominated lightweight in
the publication or related media. We have divided the papers
according to the results provided: protocol designs, algo-
rithm speciﬁcations, software design, FPGA implementation,
ASIC implementation.
CAT1: LIGHTWEIGHT PROTOCOLS
Protocols denominated lightweight aim to provide security
services for constrained applications. These security services
involve most commonly authentication, signature, and key
establishment, but data encryption is also considered. The
works which involve protocol design usually do not carry
out implementation of their solutions, and so the efﬁciency
of these schemes is evaluated using estimated metrics for
the number of operations required and the amount of bits
transmitted.
Table 2 presents a summary of the most important char-
acteristics of the reviewed protocols. The security services
and application scope for each protocol are provided. The dif-
ferent cryptographic primitives required and the participants
considered are also reported.
CAT1 Strategies and remarks
All the protocols reviewed specify an application scope.
Most predominantly, IoT and its underlying technologies are
chosen as proposed applications. In order of predominance,
the proposed protocols perform tasks of authentication, key
establishment, encryption, and digital signatures.
Although most of the works specify a preference for a
prime or a binary ﬁnite ﬁeld, the ﬁeld length is not always
available. A speciﬁc elliptic curve is not clearly proposed
in most of the cases and neither is the group generator
or its order. Similarly, the group operations or the point
representation required to perform the scalar multiplication
are rarely described.
From the reviewed works which have been classiﬁed under
the protocol abstraction level, all of them rely on the scalar
multiplication, with high predominance of pseudo-random
number generators (PRNG) and symmetric primitives such
hash functions and block ciphers. Some of them require addi-
tional ﬁeld operations which have been included as modular
arithmetic in Table 2.
As for evaluation metrics, the number of operations, the
runtime, and the bits transmitted are the most popular alter-
natives. If the protocol was implemented then it is possible to
obtain a runtime, if not, the operations cost is provided. The
VOLUME 4, 2016 15


===== PAGE 16 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
TABLE 2. Summary of the main characteristics for the surveyed protocols denominated lightweight.
Y
ear Work Ref. Basis
Services Application Primiti
ves required Participants Evaluation
2007
Kim et al. [36] ECC
over F2m
andm = 193 – Sign. RFID kP
, PRNG.
– RFID tag
– RFID reader
– Back-end server with a DB
Operations
2010 Kim et al. [37] ECC
over Fp – Enc. RFID kP
, PRNG. – Mobile terminal
– Server Runtime
2012 Ju et al. [38] ECC
over Fp – Key est. WSN kP
, PRNG, Hash function, Symmetric cipher. – Two sensor nodes Runtime and
operations
2013 Bakhache et al. [39]
ECC
over Fq
– Key est.
– Auth.
Low-power
networks
kP
, PRNG, Hash function. – Two users Operations
2014 Druml et al. [40] ECC
over Fp – Auth. RFID kP
, PRNG.
– Smart card
– Mobile reader device
– Back-end server
Runtime
2014 Yao et al. [41]
ECC
over Fp
– Enc.
– Sign.
Mobile
systems
kP
, PRNG, Hash function, MAC function,
Symmetric cipher.
– Two mobile devices Operations
2014 He et al. [42] ECC
over Fp – Auth RFID kP
, PRNG. – RFID tag
– Back-end server with a DB Bits
2016 Chaudhry et al. [43]
ECC
over Fp
and|p| = 160
– Key est.
– Auth. IoT
kP
, PRNG, 4 Hash functions. – Server
– Users Operations
2016 Reddy et al. [44]
ECC
over Fq
– Auth.
– Key est.
Mobile
systems
kP
, PRNG, Hash function, MAC function .
– Smart card
– Foreign agent
– Home agent
Operations
2016 He et al. [45]
ECC
over Fp
– Key est.
– Auth Smart grid
kP
, PRNG, 3 Hash function.
– Smart meter
– Server provider
– Trusted anchor
Runtime
2016 Lavanya and
Natarajan [46]
ECC
over Fp
– Key est.
– Auth. IoT
kP
, PRNG, Hash function, Symmetric cipher.
– Initiator
– Responder
– Security association
-
2016 Kaur et al. [47]
ECC
over F2m
andm = 163 – Auth RFID kP
, PRNG. – RFID tag
– Server Bits and runtime
2017 Zhang et al. [48] ECC
over Fq
– Auth.
– Key est.
IoT
WSN
kP
, PRNG, 4 Hash functions, MAC function. – Client
– Server Operations
2017 Win et al. [49]
ECC
over Fp
and|p| = 160 – Auth. IoT kP
, PRNG, 4 Hash functions, Symmetric ci-
pher.
– Trusted 3rd party
– Users
Operations
and runtime
2017 Mathur et al. [50]
ECC
over Fp
– Auth.
– Enc.
– Key est.
IoT
kP
, PRNG, Hash function, Symmetric cipher.
– Sensors
– Router
– Base station
Runtime, cycles,
and energy
2017 Mahmood et al. [51]
ECC
over Fp
and|p| = 160 – Auth. Smart grid kP
, PRNG, 3 Hash functions – User
– Trusted 3rd party
Operations
and bits
2017 Diro et al. [52], [53]
ECC
over Fp
and|p| = 160 – Auth. IoT kP
, PRNG. – Nodes
– Broker
Operations
and bits
2017 Badra and
Zeadally [54]
ECC
over Fp
and|p| = 160
– Auth.
– Key est.
– Enc.
Smart grid kP
, PRNG, Symmetric homomorphic en-
cryption, MAC function.
– Energy supplier
– Smart meter
Operations
and bits
2017 Lavanya and
Natarajan [55]
ECC
over Fp – Key est. IoT kP
, PRNG, Hash function, Symmetric ci-
pher, Signature.
– Initiator
– Responder Network metrics
2017 Meddah et al. [56]
ECC
over Fp
– Auth.
– Enc.
PHR over
the Cloud
kP
, PRNG, Hash function, MAC function,
Symmetric cipher.
– Certiﬁcate authority
– Cloud Service Provider
– Users
Bits
2017 Mohammedi
et al. [57]
ECC
over Fq
– Auth.
– Key est.
Mobile
healthcare
kP
, PRNG, Hash function. – Remote server
– Mobile device
Bits and
runtime.
2017 Hasan et al. [58]
ECC
over Fp
and|p| = 224
– Auth.
– Enc. IoT kP
, PRNG, Hash function, Symmetric en-
cryption.
– Integrated agent
– Smart object
Runtime and
operations
2017 Sojka and
Langendoerfer [59]
ECC
over Fp
– Enc.
– Sign. WSN
kP
, PRNG, Symmetric cipher. – Signer
– Veriﬁer Bits and cycles
2018 Shen et al. [60]
ECC
over Fp
– Auth.
– Key est. WBAN
kP
, PRNG, 2 Hash functions, MAC function,
Symmetric encryption.
– Personal digital assistance
– Sensor nodes
– Application provider
Operations
2018 Tewari et al. [61] ECC
over F2m
andm = 193 – Auth. RFID kP
, PRNG, Hash function. – Server
– Tag Bits
2018 Diro et al. [62]
ECC
over Fp
and|p|∈
{160, 256, 512}
– Enc. Fog of
Things
kP
, PRNG. – Fog node
– IoT device
Runtime
and bits
2018 Vaniprabha
and Poongodi [63]
ECC
over Fq – Auth. WBAN kP
, PRNG, 2 Hash functions.
– Veriﬁer
– Bio sensor
– Data controller
– Data feeder
Runtime and
network metrics
2018 Shen et al. [64]
ECC
over Fq – Auth. WBAN kP
, PRNG, 3 Hash functions, MAC function.
– Network manager
– WBAN user
– Cloud server
Runtime and
operations
2018 Mood and
Nikooghadam [65]
ECC
over Fp
p521, Curve25519 – Auth. Smart grid kP
, PRNG, Hash function. – Trust anchor
– Two users
Runtime, bits,
and operations.
2018 Almulhim
and Zaman [66]
ECC
over Fq – Auth. IoT-based
e-Health
-
–
Healthcare provider
– Server
– Base station
– Head node
– Sensor nodes
-
2018 Mohammedi
et al. [67]
ECC
over Fp
and|p|∈
{160, 192, 224, 256}
– Auth.
Home
healthcare
systems
kP
, PRNG, Hash function. – Remote server
– Patient Runtime and bits.amount of information transmitted is also important since it
determines the bandwidth requirements of a proposal.
Designing a security protocol is a challenging task. The
base knowledge required ranges from cryptographic basis,
passing by networking theory, to attack models.
In the case of the ﬁrst, it is necessary to deﬁne a strong
16 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 17 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
cryptographic basis for the security of the protocol to rely on.
Elliptic curves are interesting in this regard as they require
smaller operand sizes than other asymmetric techniques and
so contribute to reduce the transmission costs.
Assumptions about the network model and topology de-
termine the number of participants in the protocol. Even
though the basic scenario involves a two party system, it is
also possible to consider third party service providers (e.g.
Certifying Agencies), back-end servers, databases, or group
schemes. Having less participants simpliﬁes the network
speciﬁcations required but increases the complexity in the
design and so the overhead of the protocol in the underlying
systems.
The application scope can also help to determine the
attacks which are more important to offer protections against.
Creating a protocol which resists more attack models im-
proves the security of the network, but this results on requir-
ing more underlying operations, more diverse cryptographic
operations, and often more complex network speciﬁcation
requirements.
From the survey, it can be noted how a common approach
is to limit the computations that are performed in the con-
strained device and to deﬁne properly which attacks should
the system be protected against. These strategies coupled
with the use of efﬁcient classes of elliptic curves can help to
achieve a protocol speciﬁcation which can be denominated
lightweight.
CAT2: LIGHTWEIGHT ALGORITHMS
In our survey we have identiﬁed cryptographic algorithms
which are designed to be more efﬁcient than generic alterna-
tives. Table 3 provides a summary of the different algorithms
surveyed. In this table we report the problem which is solved
by the algorithm, the cryptographic basis of the proposal, the
approach followed by the authors to design the algorithm,
and the goal of such design.
CAT2 Strategies and remarks
In most of the surveyed works with emphasis at the algorith-
mic level the main goal is to improve the running time of the
scalar multiplication. By exploring novel families of elliptic
curves, special primes to deﬁne ﬁnite ﬁelds, or special point
representations, each work aims to reduce the number of ﬁeld
operations required in the group arithmetic. The end goals
for such optimizations are usually improving performance
by requiring fewer operations or by requiring fewer storage
registers.
Even though it results convenient to divide the algorithms
found in the literature in two classes for benchmarking pur-
poses, the strategies involved in the creation of a lightweight
algorithm are similar.
Using special families of elliptic curves or special point
representations allows reducing the number of ﬁeld opera-
tions required to perform group operations (point multipli-
cation, point addition, point doubling). This helps both the
algorithms and their implementation.
The use of mathematic resources such as the common Z
strategy (Co-Z) [77] is an alternative which can also lead
to reduction in the number of ﬁeld operations or registers
required in an algorithm. In this case the point representation
is modiﬁed during processing, at the cost of point conversions
before or after processing.
Factoring common expressions is a technique which helps
to reduce the number of computations required at the cost of
extra memory to hold the intermediate results. This method is
interesting for systems that can afford to use some temporary
registers in order to reduce the total number of operations. In
the same tone, performing the calculations as constants pre-
deployment can free up processor cycles at the cost of the
energy required to hold the value. Both strategies are found
in contributions of novel formulae with reduced number of
ﬁeld operations.
The ﬁeld representation can also be exploited in order to
improve the efﬁciency of an ECC-based realization. The Op-
timal Prime Fields and the pseudo-Mersenne prime ﬁelds are
a couple of such cases. The inﬂuence of the prime selection
varies from reducing storage space, achieving completeness
in the group operations, obtaining processor-friendly ﬁeld
arithmetic, among others.
CAT3: LIGHTWEIGHT ECC REALIZATIONS
3a) Software implementations
Table 4 shows a summary of the papers reporting algorithms
for lightweight cryptography implemented in software. This
table reports the cryptographic basis of the different im-
plementations but also provides technical details about the
underlying platform, the performance benchmark, and the
implementation goal.
3b) Hardware architectures
All the hardware implementations surveyed propose an archi-
tectural design. Generally speaking, a hardware architecture
is the realization of an algorithm using digital circuits. In this
sense, a group of hardware components is interconnected in
a way that through the use of control signals it is possible
to perform computations over the input data and achieve
a desired result. These can be classiﬁed as processors, co-
processors or standalone architectures. The main difference
between these approaches lies on the generality of the solu-
tion. Whilst a processor should be able to perform a wide
range of related operations, compromising the generality
allows for implementation optimizations to achieve more
efﬁcient solutions.
Table 5 summarizes the main characteristics and bench-
mark for the different FPGA implementations found in the
literature denominated lightweight. In this case we consider
that all the works surveyed for FPGA implementation of ECC
feature the Architecture characteristic.
3b) Hardware circuits
Once an architecture has been conceptually designed and
described, there is still an implementation step required to
VOLUME 4, 2016 17


===== PAGE 18 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
TABLE 3. Summary of the different abstract algorithms denominated lightweight which were surveyed.
Y
ear Work Ref. T
o solve Curve Field Approach
2010
Sojka et al. [59], [68] Enc.
and
sign.
SEC Fp where 32≤|p|≤ 64 Applying
several changes in the standard ECC parameter sets and algorithms the authors
propose a public/secret key hybrid with a reasonable security level and shorter key sizes.
2014 Azarderakhsh et
al.
[69] k
P Koblitz F2m wherem = 163 The
work introduces a new technique for point addition in afﬁne coordinate which
requires fewer registers.
2014 Liu et al. [15], [70] k
P GLV ,
Montgomery
Fp wherep =u· 2k +v The
authors study a special call of ﬁnite ﬁelds denominated Optimal Prime Fields (OPF)
which reduce storage requirements and simpliﬁes the modular reduction operation. Using
these OPFs the authors propose a special variant of Montgomery multiplication.
2014 Liu et al. [14], [71]
k
P MoTE Fp where |p| ∈
{160, 192, 224, 256}
A
special form of elliptic curves are presented to exploit the advantages of OPF. These
are used to develop optimized ﬁeld algorithms and achieve efﬁcient implementations.
2015 Roy et al. [72] k
P Koblitz F2m wherem = 283 The
work introduces a lightweight variant of a scalar conversion algorithm that enables
enhanced performance in the implementation of ECC with binary Koblitz curves.
2015 Koziel et al. [73] k
P Binary Edwards F2m where
m∈{ 163, 233, 283}
The
authors propose formulae for point addition and doubling in Binary Edwards curves
which reduce the number of ﬁeld operations required for a scalar multiplication and the
number of registers.
2017 Khleborodov [74]
k
P Prime Fp Proposes
scalar multiplication algorithms based on binary and binary-NAF scalar repre-
sentation methods using mixed coordinate representations.
2018 Järvinen et al. [75] Sign.
Koblitz F2m where
m∈{ 163, 233, 283}
“In
this paper, we show how the computationally weaker party of a cryptosystem can
delegate conversions to the more powerful party by computing all operations directly in
theτ-adic domain with a small datapath extension forτ-adic arithmetic.”
2018 Khleborodov [76]
k
P Prime Fp Proposes
the window NAF form for scalar representation, which is used to develop a
scalar multiplication algorithm with mixed coordinates.
obtain the physical realization of the system. The implemen-
tation of hardware architectures can be approached from two
main technologies which currently rule the market: using
an FPGA or creating an ASIC. In both cases, a formal
description of the architecture is used to generate a resistor-
transistor level (RTL) description of the circuit. This new
description is then mapped to a reconﬁgurable array of Look-
Up-Tables, Flip-Flops, and other generics in the physical
FPGA board. Or compiled using CMOS libraries into an
array of transistors which is then manufactured into a silicon
chip. The main advantages of the FPGA technology is the
rapid development and implementation process which make
it captivating for prototyping and testing. In the case of ASIC
the main advantage lies on the technology level optimizations
(Circuit) which can be applied to the chip in order to achieve
greater efﬁciency.
The ASIC implementations of ECC found in the literature
are summarized in Table 6. In this case we consider that all
the ASIC proposals surveyed perform optimizations at circuit
level and hence feature the Circuit characteristic according
to the abstraction levels proposed. The benchmark for ASIC
implementation reports the technology used, the implemen-
tation costs in GEs, the latency of the circuit, and the power
and energy estimations when available.
CAT3 Strategies and remarks
Software implementations are intended for providing secu-
rity services. As it can be noted from Table 4, only seven
surveyed software implementations perform scalar multipli-
cation routines. In most of the cases the curves used are
deﬁned, ranging from a curve-optimized solution to offering
support for a family of curves. The security levels offered
range from 80 to 128 bits in the majority of the cases.
The preferred optimization goal identiﬁed was to improve
performance, in the form of shorter runtimes.
The implementation platforms are not uniform in archi-
tectural type nor register size. Some of the surveyed papers
developed software implementations for generic processors,
which are usually found in environments where regular ECC
can be used. Most of the implementations targeted processors
are available in mobile systems—like smartphones. Whereas
the processing power of these chips is not a problem, they
can still beneﬁt from ECLC traits such as low energy con-
sumption and small bandwidth requirements. Lastly, only a
handful of the implementations targeted the lower end of
processors which are found in WSN motes and RFID tags. In
these cases both the processor time and the energy footprint
of the implementation ought to be observed closely.
As for evaluation of the proposals, some of the metrics re-
ported are the runtime, the operational frequency achievable,
the latency, and the energy consumption. These are in line
with software implementations.
All the architectural designs found in the literature focus
on the computation of the scalar multiplication. Either as a
processor, or a co-processor, or as an independent dedicated
core. These works often deﬁne the curve or family of curves
which is used, with security levels ranging from 80 to 128 bits
in most of the cases. The FPGAs utilized are divided between
Xilinx, Altera, and MicroSemi boards.
As implementation metrics the FPGA resources are re-
ported for almost all of the cases. The operational frequency
and latency cycles are also almost always reported. At dif-
ference of software implementations however, the main opti-
mization goal is reducing the area or the resource usage.
Similarly as with the case of FPGA implementations, all
of the ASIC related works propose designs to perform scalar
multiplications. In these references, however, it is possible
to note how the number of supported curves per proposal is
reduced from an average of 3.7 to 1.85 curves per work. This
is evidence of the main difference between FPGA and ASIC
works: FPGAs allow rapid prototyping and some generality
pre and post synthesis, ASIC designs are more optimized to
take advantage of the domain parameters selected.
The libraries used in the surveyed works range from
180nm to 65nm. As implementation metrics, the works report
area in GE, operational frequency, latency cycles, power
dissipation, and energy consumption. As in the case of FPGA
implementations, ASIC oriented works seem to favor area
18 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 19 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
TABLE 4. Summary of the reviewed ECC implementations in software denominated lightweight.
Y
ear Work Ref. Impl.
Curve Field Sec. Processor Runtime
(ms)
Freq.
(MHz) Cycles Po
wer
(µW)
Energy
(µJ)
2011
Sojka et al. [78] k
P
- Fp 16 MSP430F5438 1816.28
8.00 - - -
- Fp 64
MSP430F5438 81457.76
8.00 - - -
- Fp 80
MSP430F5438 157432.61
8.00 - - -
- Fp 96
MSP430F5438 259788.89
8.00 - - -
Montgomery Fp 80
ATmega128 -
- 5545000 - -2012 Wenger [79] kP GL
V Fp 80 ATmega128 -
- 3930000 - -
2013 Wenger [80] k
P
secp160r1 Fp 80 MSP430 -
1.00 5721420
openMSP430 -
1.00 5445010 55.90 304.30
secp192r1 Fp 96 MSP430 -
1.00 9100128
openMSP430 -
1.00 8650455 53.90 466.70
sect163r2 F2m 80 MSP430 -
1.00 7446677
openMSP430 -
1.00 7216905 49.10 354.30
c2tnb191v1 F2m 96 MSP430 -
1.00 8610906
openMSP430 -
1.00 8376138 55.40 463.80
2013 Namal et al. [81] Auth.
- - - i5 -
2670.00 - - -
2014 Druml et al. [40] Auth.
secp192r1 Fp 96 Inﬁneon 26.20
30.00 - - -
2014 Höller et al. [82] k
P B163 F2m 80 - -
13.56 9700000 - -
2015 Piñol-Piñol
et al. [83]
Sign
RFC6090 Fp
80 STM32F103 2000.00
24.00 - - -
96
STM32F103 3000.00
24.00 - - -
128
STM32F103 6000.00
24.00 - - 76230.00
V
erify RFC6090 Fp
80 STM32F103 4000.00
24.00 - - -
96
STM32F103 6000.00
24.00 - - -
128
STM32F103 12000.00
24.00 - - 153840.00
80
ATmega128 -
8.00 5527000 - -
96
ATmega128 -
8.00 8837000 - -
112
ATmega128 -
8.00 13255000 - -Montgomery Fp
128
ATmega128 -
8.00 18893000 - -
80
ATmega128 -
8.00 3135000 - -
96
ATmega128 -
8.00 4954000 - -
112
ATmega128 -
8.00 7475000 - -
2016 Liu et al. [15] k
P
GLV+TEC Fp
128 ATmega128 -
8.00 10501000 - -
2016 He et al. [45] K
ey est. - Fp 160 Quad-core 13.44
2450000.00 - - -
2016 Kaur et al. [47] Auth.
B163 F2m 80 - 192.00
- - - -
2016 Liu et al. [71] k
P
MoTE P159 Fp 80 ATmega128 -
7.37 5468000 - -
MoTE
P191 Fp 96 ATmega128 -
7.37 8659000 - -
MoTE
P223 Fp 112 ATmega128 -
7.37 12879000 - -
MoTE
P255 Fp 128 ATmega128 -
7.37 18270000 - -
MoTE
P159 Fp 80 MSP430F1611 -
7.37 3476000 - -
-
7.37 4276000 - -
MoTE
P191 Fp 96 MSP430F1611 -
7.37 5381000 - -
-
7.37 6686000 - -
MoTE
P223 Fp 112 MSP430F1611 -
7.37 7151000 - -
-
7.37 9808000 - -
MoTE
P255 Fp 128 MSP430F1611 -
7.37 10952000 - -
-
7.37 13782000 - -
2017 Win et al. [49] Enc.
/Dec. P160 Fp 80 Galaxy Nexus 5000.00/
1200.00 -
- - -
2017 Mathur et al. [50] ECDH
- Fp - openmote 682.60
16.00 10912000 - 21490.00
2017 Hasan et al. [58] BR
OSMAP secp224k1 Fp 112 Galaxy Note 5 66.87
- - - -
2017 Sojka and
Langendoerfer [59] k
P - Fp
16 MSP430F5438A -
1.00 409120 - -
64
MSP430F5438A -
1.00 651662120 - -
96
MSP430F5438A -
1.00 2078311103 - -
80
i7-6700HQ 3.59/1.24
2600 - - -
128
i7-6700HQ 28.26/6.48
2600 - - -2018 Diro et al. [62] Enc./Dec.
(256
bits) - Fp
256 i7-6700HQ 541.79/222.33
2600 - - -
2018 Shen el al. [64] Auth.
- Fq - Pentium 41.367
3300 - - -
P521 Fp 256
Cortex-M3 1263
100 - - -2018 Mood et al. [65] k
P Curve25519 Fp 128 Cortex-M3 87
100 - - -
reducing optimizations.
The use of speciﬁc instructions which help to improve the
performance of the implementation is also valid for software
realizations. Some libraries have been made available with
highly optimized routines which improve the processors
efﬁciency. Some rely on exploiting the word size of the
architecture in order to achieve instruction-level parallelism
whereas others make use of mathematical cores available to
the processor such as ﬂoating point units and DSPs.
To create lightweight architectures it is important to ﬁrst
analyze the algorithm and determine, considering that a hard-
ware implementation is sought, modiﬁcations in order to sim-
plify the design. Compared to software realizations, hardware
solutions often have trouble dealing with the control structure
required by the system. A simpliﬁed architecture implies a
simpliﬁed controller. Complexity in the control of the circuit
can generate resource overhead and increased latency.
The processing generality required in the implementation
is what determines the hardware design approach. Com-
plex algorithms which rely heavily on conditionals or that
require a wide set of subroutines are easier to implement
in an application speciﬁc processor. If the implementation
already considers the use of a processing system, hardware
acceleration can be achieved with a dedicated co-processor
and mapped memory. If the algorithm is simple enough and
repetitive, then a hardware architecture is the best choice.
All of these approaches can be used to solve a problem, the
difference will be noticeable in the design complexity and the
VOLUME 4, 2016 19


===== PAGE 20 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
TABLE 5. Summary of the reviewed ECC implementations in FPGA denominated lightweight.
Y
ear Work Ref. Impl.
Curve Field Sec. FPGA FF
LUT SLC/
ALM/LE
BRAM/
MEM DSP Fmax
(MHz) Cycles
-
- 773 3 1 210 1722088XC2VP7-5FG456 -
- 1158 3 4 210 765072
-
- 3690 12 - 109 1722088P224 Fp 112
A2F500M3G-STD -
- 7832 12 - 109 765072
-
- 774 3 1 210 2103941XC2VP7-5FG456 -
- 1158 3 4 210 949951
-
- 3690 12 - 109 2103941
2011 Varchola et al. [84] k
P
P256 Fp 128
A2F500M3G-STD -
- 7832 12 - 109 949951
2012 Trujillo-Olaya
et al. [4] k
P -
F2m ≤ 20 EP3SE50F780C2 1704
2049 - 820 - 173 5576
1551
2153 - 800 - 177 5699
F2m ≤ 26 EP3SE50F780C2 2093
2551 - 1060 - 161 9116
1902
2451 - 1060 - 171 9328
F2m ≤ 30 EP3SE50F780C2 2363
2808 - 1220 - 152 11956
F2m ≤ 35 EP3SE50F780C2 2696
3158 - 1420 - 147 16046
F2m ≤ 39 EP3SE50F780C2 2958
3440 - 1580 - 134 19750
2239
3129 - 1580 - 148 20224
F2m ≤ 44 EP3SE50F780C2 3289
3958 - 1780 - 115 24920
2952
4258 - 1780 - 138 25365
F2m ≤ 48 EP3SE50F780C2 3547
4227 - 1940 - 114 29488
3183
4705 - 1940 - 132 29876
F2m ≤ 51 EP3SE50F780C2 3750
4405 - 2060 - 110 33166
F2m ≤ 56 EP3SE50F780C2 4081
4766 - 2260 - 109 39776
3650
5277 - 2260 - 130 40341
F2m ≤ 63 EP3SE50F780C2 4555
5226 - 2540 - 105 50038
F2m ≤ 80 EP3SE50F780C2 5725
6536 - 3260 - 96 80685
5107
8203 - 3260 - 104 81826
Spartan-3 507
1028 569 3 1 - -secp160r1 Fp 80 Spartan-6 482
630 221 3 1 - -
Spartan-3 507
1028 569 3 1 - -2012 Driessen et al. [85] k
P
P256 Fp 128 Spartan-6 482
630 221 3 1 - -
2013 Schramm and
Grzemba [86] k
P
P192 Fp 80 - -
- - - - - -
P224 Fp 112
- -
- - - - - -
P256 Fp 128
- -
- - - - - -
P384 Fp 192
- -
- - - - - -
P521 Fp 256
- -
- - - - - -
2013 Wenger et al. [87] k
P B163 F2m 80 XC2VP7 -
- - - - - -
2016 Roy et al. [88] k
P P256 Fp 128 Virtex-5 35
212 81 24 8 172 1903650
Spartan-6 35
193 72 24 8 156 1903650
80
- -
- 937 2 - - 4900002016 Yalçin [89] k
P - Fp 128 - -
- 1036 2 - - 480000
2017 Salman et al. [90] k
P - Fp 96-256
xc7z020clg484-3a 939
1118 318 2 - 164 27991781 b
4606
2765 1224 2 - 178 3392812 b
xc7a100tcsg324-3a 939
1135 312 2 - 187 27991781 b
xc7vx485tf
fg1761-3a 948
1166 325 2 - 155 27991781 b
xc7vx485tf
fg1761-3a 4606
3144 996 2 - 243 3392812 b
xc6vlx240tf
f1156-3a 4606
2840 1174 2 - 239 3392812 b
5SGXEA7K2F40C3a 647
961 588 20480 - 224 27991781 b
5084
4841 2629 20480 - 237 3392812 b
5CEB
A4F23C7a 571
961 588 20912 - 119 27991781 b
EP4SE530H35C4a 952
933 899 20480 - 185 27991781 b
4617
4031 3681 20480 - 191 3392812 b
M2GL005S:1FG484a 1269
2079 2522 10 - 97 3392812 b
4926
5927 6839 10 - 93 3392812 b
a Best
results are retrieved.
b Average latency for the different ﬁeld lengths supported.
resource
consumption of the ﬁnal product.
Common approaches identiﬁed from the literature in the
design of lightweight architectures for ECC involve:
• Determining if a speciﬁc module is really necessary
or if the operation can be performed differently (e.g.
squarings, inversions).
• Adjusting the word size of ﬁeld multipliers to look for
the best trade-off between resources and performance.
• Adjusting the width of the datapath to reduce the re-
sources required to process the data.
• Modifying the way in which the data is stored in the
system to reduce read/write times or to simplify the
control.
In regards to circuits, the implementation might be im-
proved in order to reduce the physical size, reduce the latency
in processing, memory access times, or energy consumption.
Selecting the most suitable implementation technology for
the application (e.g. LUT-4 vs. LUT-6), selecting a speciﬁc
type of memory (e.g. BRAM vs. distributed), preventing
spurious computations, and applying clocking techniques
(e.g. clock enable and multiclock domain), are all circuit
speciﬁc optimizations which can be performed to almost any
architectural design in order to improve the efﬁciency of the
implementation.
V . ASSESSMENT OF THE SURVEYED WORKS
In the previous section we provided a classiﬁcation based
on objective data retrieved from the surveyed works. We
20 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 21 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
TABLE 6. Summary of the reviewed ECC implementations in ASIC denominated lightweight.
Y
ear Work Ref. Impl.
Curve Field Sec. Tech. Area
(GE)
Freq
(MHz) Cycles Po
wer
(µW)
Energy
(µJ)
2012
Wenger [79] k
P Montgomery Fp 80 130nm 20980
- 1300000 - -
2013 Wenger [87] k
P
secp160r1 Fp 80 130nm 17738
13.56 37168 561.00 1539.00
22537
13.56 1298 1013.00 97.00
secp192r1 Fp 96
130nm 16877
13.56 55365 640.00 2615.00
23825
13.56 1813 1084.00 145.00
secp224r1 Fp 112
130nm 17215
13.56 86058 663.00 4208.00
25113
13.56 2469 1032.00 188.00
secp256r1 Fp 128
130nm 19506
13.56 130695 656.00 6320.00
27244
13.56 3367 1031.00 256.00
2013 Wenger et al. [91] k
P B163 F2m 80 130nm -
- - - -
2013 Wenger [80] k
P sect163r2 F2m 80 130nm
11778
1.00 342724 93.80 32.10
12662
1.00 174910 112.90 19.70
13307
1.00 94882 152.40 14.50
14552
1.00 54376 181.7 9.90
9624
1.00 467370 66.10 30.90
10405
1.00 303202 77.6 23.50
11022
1.00 224222 73.6 16.50
12270
1.00 182130 70.00 12.80
11571
0.10 106700 0.66 0.652014 Azarderakhsh
et al. [69]
k
P K163 F2m 80 65nm 11571
13.56 106700 77.20 0.61
2014 Höller et al. [82] k
P B163 F2m 80 220nm
7510
13.56 12100000 - -
8920
13.56 9400000 - -
10550
13.56 7000000 - -
10290
13.56 5100000 - -
6180
13.56 2800000 - -
2015 Roy et al. [72] k
P K283 F2m 128 130nm 10204
16.00 1566000 6.11 a -
2015 Koziel et al. [73] k
P - F2m
80 65nm 11219
- 177707 - -
112
65nm 15177
- 351856 - -
128
65nm 19332
- 512555 - -
2016 Bosmans et al. [92] k
P P256 Fp 128 130nm 11727
16.00 6200000 - -
2016 Yalçin et al. [89] k
P - Fp
80 180nm 11366b -
490000 - -
128
180nm 12324b -
840000 - -
2016 Goyal and
Sahula [93]
K
ey est. - Fp - 90nm 0.032mm2 -
22.4 ms - -
2018 Järvinen et al. [75] k
P
K163 F2m 80 130nm 75cd -
49700d - -
K233 F2m 112
130nm 75cd -
99686d - -
K283 F2m 128
130nm 75cd -
146118d - -
a Calculated
at 1MHz.
b External memory is required.
c Cost of the datapath extension for aτ-adic addition.
d Only best results are retrieved.
no
w try to evaluate all the papers as a set, by using the
characteristics described on Section III. Table 7 summarizes
our observations.
This data is can be used for classifying the surveyed papers
using clustering techniques. Other analysis can also be drawn
from this information. These are provided in the next section.
VI. DATA ANAL YSIS
The information retrieved from the surveyed papers can
provide insights regarding the design of novel elliptic curve
based cryptosystems that can be denominated lightweight.
For this reason it is important to present a quantitative
analysis of the related works in the literature. This section
is dedicated to provide a modern analysis and trends of the
surveyed papers.
A. STATISTICS
We now review some quantitative measurements for the
different characteristics reported in Table 7.
Lightweightness
From each paper we tried to determine the main reason for
the work to be denominated lightweight. In some of the cases
the motivation was explicitly stated in the papers. In others
it was implicit and a more complete analysis was required
to assess this characteristic as accurately as possible. All
these descriptions, as reported in Table 7, were classiﬁed in
six main reasons. The frequency for each one of these main
classes is illustrated in Fig. 12.
As it can be noted, the most predominant reasons to deﬁne
a proposal as lightweight are by designing a lightweight
protocol, by optimizing a lightweight implementation, and
by proposing some lightweight variant of ECC.
Lightweight protocols rely on reducing the communica-
tions and memory overheads. Reducing the operations count,
the operations diversity, the transmission overhead, the mem-
ory requirements, all are factors that should be covered in
their design.
A good part of the publications surveyed cover the design
and implementation of a complete cryptosystem. It is thus
important to keep in mind that an ECLC solution starts with
the elliptic curve: selecting the ﬁeld, curve, representation,
and algorithms. These are then translated into architectures
and circuits for implementation. Each one of these steps must
be aware of the application constraints.
Other reasons to deﬁne a paper as lightweight include the
use of ECC over other PKC instances, the modiﬁcation of a
previously existing solution, and comparisons with the state
VOLUME 4, 2016 21


===== PAGE 22 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
TABLE 7. Summary of the different reviewed works which have been called “lightweight” by the authors in the publication or related media (presentations). The
reason for lightweightness (A), abstraction levels (B), goals (C), system (D), implementation technology (E), and security levels are all reported for each paper. The
✓ symbol indicates that an entry complies with the characteristic in that speciﬁc column. The different design goals speciﬁed in the works are summarized in priority
order with 1st being the most important.
B.
Abstraction C.
Goals E.
Technology F
. SecurityID Year Work Ref. A B1
B2 B3 B4 B5 C1
C2 C3 C4 C5 D E1
E2 E3 F1
F2 F3
A-01
2007 Kim et al. [36] A5 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D2 ✓
A-02
2010 Kim et al. [37] A5 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D2
A-03
2010 Sojka et al. [68] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D3 ✓
A-04
2011 Varchola et al. [84] A2 ✓ 2nd
1st ✓ ✓
✓
A-05 2011 Sojka et al. [78] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D3 ✓ ✓
A-06
2012 Ju [38] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D3
A-07
2012 Wenger and Großschädl [79] A2 ✓
✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D1 ✓ ✓
A-08
2012 Trujillo-Olaya et al. [4] A3 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D2 ✓ ✓
A-09
2012 Driessen et al. [85] A5 ✓
✓ ✓ 2nd
1st 3rd D6 ✓ ✓
✓
A-10 2013 Wenger [87] A2 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D2 ✓
✓ ✓
✓ ✓
A-11 2013 Wenger et al. [91] A2 ✓ 2nd
1st D2 ✓ ✓
A-12
2013 Bakhache et al. [39] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D7
A-13
2013 Wenger [80] A2 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D3 ✓
✓ ✓
A-14
2013 Namal et al. [81] A4 1st
2nd D7 ✓
A-15
2013 Schramm and Grzemba [86] A2 ✓ 1st D6 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓
A-16 2014 Druml et al. [40] A1 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st
2nd D2 ✓ ✓
A-17
2014 Yao et al. [41] A4 1st
3rd 2nd D7
A-18
2014 Azarderakhsh et al. [69] A2 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D1 ✓ ✓
A-19
2014 Höller et al. [82] A2 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st
2nd D2 ✓
✓ ✓
A-20
2014 He et al. [42] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D2
A-21
2014 Liu et al. [70] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D3
A-22
2014 Liu et al. [14] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D3 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓
A-23 2015 Piñol-Piñol et al. [83] A2 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D1 ✓ ✓
✓
A-24 2015 Roy et al. [72] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ 3rd
2nd 1st D1 ✓ ✓
A-25
2015 Koziel et al. [73] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ 2nd
1st D1 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓
A-26 2016 Bosmans et al. [92] A2 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D1 ✓ ✓
A-27
2016 Chaudhry et al. [43] A6 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D1 ✓
A-28
2016 Yalçin [89] A2 ✓
✓ 1st D1 ✓
✓ ✓
✓
A-29 2016 Roy et al. [88] A2 ✓ 1st D1 ✓ ✓
A-30
2016 Liu et al. [15] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D3 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓
A-31 2016 Reddy et al. [44] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D7
A-32
2016 He et al. [45] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D5 ✓ ✓
A-33
2016 Lavanya and Natarajan [46] A4 1st
2nd D1
A-34
2016 Kaur et al. [47] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D2 ✓ ✓
A-35
2016 Goyal and Sahula [93] A4 2nd
1st D1 ✓ ✓
A-36
2016 Liu et al. [71] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D1 ✓
✓ ✓
A-37 2017 Zhang et al. [48] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D1
A-38
2017 Win et al. [49] A6 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st
2nd D1 ✓ ✓
A-39
2017 Salman et al. [90] A2 ✓ 1st
2nd 3rd D6 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓
A-40 2017 Mathur et al. [50] A5 ✓
✓ ✓ 2nd
1st D1 ✓
A-41
2017 Mahmood et al. [51] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D5 ✓
A-42
2017 Diro et al. [52] A4 2nd
1st D1 ✓
A-43
2017 Khleborodov [74] A3 ✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D1
A-44
2017 Badra and Zeadally [54] A6 ✓
✓ 3rd
2nd 1st D5 ✓
A-45
2017 Diro et al. [53] A4 2nd
1st D1 ✓
A-46
2017 Lavanya and Natarajan [55] A5 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D1
A-47
2017 Meddah et al. [56] A6 ✓
✓ 1st D4
A-48
2017 Mohammedi et al. [57] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D4
A-49
2017 Hasan et al. [58] A4 1st
2nd D1 ✓ ✓
A-50
2017 Sojka et al. [59] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D3 ✓ ✓
A-51
2018 Shen et al. [60] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
3rd 1st D4
A-52
2018 Tewari et al. [61] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st 3rd D2 ✓
A-53
2018 Diro et al. [62] A4 2nd
3rd 1st D1 ✓ ✓
✓
A-54 2018 Järvinen [75] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 3rd
2nd 1st D1 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓
A-55 2018 Vaniprabha and Poongodi [63] A4 3rd
1st 2nd D4
A-56
2018 Shen et al. [64] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
3rd 1st D4 ✓
A-57
2018 Mood and Nikooghadam [65] A1 ✓
✓ ✓ 3rd
1st 2nd D5 ✓ ✓
A-58
2018 Khleborodov [76] A3 ✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D1
A-59
2018 Almulhim and Zaman [66] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D4
A-60
2018 Mohammedi et al. [67] A6 2nd
3rd 1st D4 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓
of the art. These works showcase that the term “lightweight”
is often used without the adequate substance to back the
deﬁnition. Whereas it is not harmful to use the concept
subjectively, it has the negative effect of misleading the
researches which might be interested in this ﬁeld of study.
Abstraction goals
We have also analyzed to what extent the ﬁve abstractions
levels for ECLC are observed. The results are presented in
Fig. 13. As it can be noted, the quantity of papers which
posses each characteristic has an inverse relation with the
degree of speciﬁcity (from design to implementation). It is
reasonable to expect that full systems which require longer
development times (processors, co-processors, standalone
cores) would be scarcer than protocols.
What we found surprising is that only 60% of the surveyed
papers make use of the underlying system characteristics to
create ECLC solutions. A possible explanation is that works
without a clear problem to solve (technological challenge)
seek to maintain generality and provide functionality for
22 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 23 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
A1. New Protocol (25%)
A2. Optimized implementation (21.7%)
A3. Modification to ECC (21.7%)
A4. ECC-based (15%)
A5. (8.33%)
A6. (8.33%)
FIGURE 12. Distribution of the main reasons to denominate use the adjective
lightweight in the surveyed papers.
FIGURE 13. Distribution of the surveyed works for the different abstraction
levels. Note that the total does not equal 100% since some works appear in
multiple categories.
multiple systems. This contradicts the expectation that an
ECC solution called “lightweight” is optimized for a speciﬁc
technology. Even if the implementation scope is not clear,
it would be convenient to at least observe the standards that
govern the technology and derive optimizations from them.
Design goals
The study of the design goals identiﬁed from the papers
can provide insights into the differences between ECLC and
other classes of lightweight cryptography. Fig. 14 shows how
the design goals are represented in the surveyed papers. It
can be noted that a primordial factor for ECLC systems
is to achieve good performance, then security, and third to
reduce the resource requirements of the system (hardware,
bandwidth, energy). ECC generally is used to because of
improved security, thus it is not surprising that security is a
FIGURE 14. Percentage of publications associated with the different design
goals presented in the survey. Note that the total does not equal 100% since
some works appear in multiple categories.
D1. IoT (39%)
D2. RFID (16.9%)
D3. WSN (13.6%)
D4. e-H ealth (11.9%)
D5. (6.78%) D6. (6.78%)
D7. (5.08%)
FIGURE 15. Distribution of the application scope reported for the different
surveyed works.
top goal in the surveyed papers. But it is also true that ECC
systems suffer from lengthy latencies. Consequently, unlike
other types of lightweight cryptography, ECLC will try ﬁrst
to address the performance constraints of the system and then
observe the resource requirements of the application.
Target system
Other aspect that is important to remark from the surveyed
papers is the application scope for which they were designed.
Lightweightness certainly is tied to the technology, identiﬁed
in this work as the ﬁrst abstraction level. Lightweight cryp-
tography is the cryptography that has been tailored for the
constrained systems. These systems, as it is shown in Fig.
15, evolve.
From our study, the IoT domain occupies the ﬁrst place of
ECLC application scope from the surveyed works. This novel
VOLUME 4, 2016 23


===== PAGE 24 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
FIGURE 16. Implementation technology for the different proposals surveyed.
Note that the total does not equal 100% since some works appear in multiple
categories.
FIGURE 17. Security level recommended by the different proposals surveyed.
Note that the total does not equal 100% since some works appear in multiple
categories.
technology promises to bring changes to the very structure of
society, hence its relevance. In second and third spots we can
ﬁnd RFID and WSN, which are often deﬁned as the basis
of IoT. Overall, these three applications cover ∼70% of the
surveyed works. Notable mentions can be made for e-Health
and Smart Grids, which are emerging technologies.
Implementation technology
This review revealed that only 50% of the surveyed papers
were implemented. Dividing the implementation technolo-
gies between software and hardware, they come even with
about 30% of the instances each. Speciﬁcally in hardware,
13% of the works were implemented in FPGA and 20% were
implemented in ASIC. These statistics are presented in Fig.
16.
Security
Fig. 17 illustrates the quantity of works which propose to use
the different security levels. As it can be noted, more than half
of the works surveyed propose to use security levels which
are no longer recommended by NIST, and a third of them
does not propose anything concrete.
B. QUALITATIVE ANAL YSIS
An analysis which relies on the characteristics of the sur-
veyed works if provided in the following.
Clustering
Using the data collected in Table 7 it is possible to classify
the surveyed papers in different groups. For doing this we
created an undirected graph where a matching characteristic
between two papers is expressed as an edge. The created
graph contains 60 nodes and 3921 edges 4 and is presented
in Fig, 18.
In that illustration each node represents a paper and each
edge represents a matching characteristic. The size of the
nodes is determined by their centrality and the weight of
the edges is given by the sum of all the edges between two
nodes. The different colors represent different communities.
Edges with weight lower than 3 have been removed for
visualization; the topology is a Circular Layout and the image
was created using Gephi5.
In the graph it is possible to appreciate the connectivity
between the clusters by the coloring of the edges. Uni-
form colors indicate inter-cluster links, mixed-color edges
represent links between clusters. By using the Modularity
analysis of Gephi it was possible to divide the papers into
four groups as detailed in Table 8. A resolution of 0.81 with
randomization and weights was used for this analysis.
The ﬁrst group with Cluster 0 is dominated by works
which are said to be lightweight by proposing an Optimized
implementation (A2). The most predominant abstraction lev-
els on this class are the architecture (B4) and the circuit
(B5). The predominant optimization goals involve hardware
resources (C2) in all the cases. In this cluster we can ﬁnd
almost all the FPGA and ASIC implementations.
The second set with Cluster 1 includes several works
which propose a Modiﬁcation to ECC (A3). The predominant
abstraction levels are system (B1) and algorithm (B3). The
main goal for all but one instances is to improve performance,
and almost all the implementations included target proces-
sors.
In the third group, Cluster 3, we can note that the main
reason for calling the works lightweight is by designing a
New protocol (A1). Almost all the instances observed the
system (B1) and the protocol (B2) abstraction levels. In
these instances the optimization goal is performance (C1) or
security (C2).
This method resulted effective to divide the papers in
possible sets of interest. However, when the number of sur-
veyed papers is extensive, it becomes difﬁcult to collect the
data needed for the classiﬁcation. This is more relevant in
instances where it is sought to initially ﬁlter papers which
might be related with the topic of interest and thus be attrac-
tive for the community. Modern data mining algorithms allow
4The graph data is available at https://www.tamps.cinvestav.mx/~datasets/
5https://gephi.org/
24 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 25 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
A-01
A-02
A-03
A-04
A-05
A-06
A-07
A-08
A-09
A-10
A-11
A-12
A-13
A-14
A-15
A-16
A-17 A-18
A-19
A-20
A-21
A-22
A-23
A-24
A-25
A-26
A-27
A-28
A-29
A-30
A-31A-32
A-33
A-34
A-35
A-36
A-37
A-38
A-39
A-40
A-41
A-42
A-43
A-44
A-45
A-46
A-47
A-48
A-49
A-50
A-51
A-52
A-53
A-54
A-55
A-56
A-57
A-58
A-59
A-60
FIGURE
18. Analysis of the surveyed papers, as presented in Table 7, as a graph. The different colors represent different communities.
extracting metadata from text sources. These data can then be
used to classify a wide set of papers.
Extended clustering
Communities are groups which can be found in sets of
items which share certain relationship. For this work these
items are publications. The set of documents surveyed, their
references, and their citations can be represented as a graph.
Classiﬁcation algorithms can then be applied over these
graphs to detect communities based on the graph’s topology.
Parting from all the documents surveyed we extracted all
of their references and linked them. In this way, multiple doc-
uments in the initial set can make reference to the same pub-
lication and become connected. Next, using Google Scholar6
we retrieved all the publications which reference the original
set of documents and linked them as well. In this second
step a new type of connections appeared in the original set.
Some works became related through the papers that cite
multiple elements of the original set. The resulting graph
contained 1640 nodes and 2160 edges 7. The weight of the
edges between documents in the original set was increased
by 2 and the weight of the citations was increased by 1.
The resulting graph is shown in Fig. 19 with a representation
6https://scholar.google.com
7The graph data is available at https://www.tamps.cinvestav.mx/~datasets/
VOLUME 4, 2016 25


===== PAGE 26 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
TABLE 8. Top three communities identiﬁed in the set of documents surveyed, classiﬁed using the data in Table 7. These three communities include∼ 92% of the
surveyed papers.
B.
Abstraction C.
Goals E.
Technology F
. SecurityID
Year Work Ref. A B1
B2 B3 B4 B5 C1
C2 C3 C4 C5 D E1
E2 E3 F1
F2 F3 Cluster
A-04
2011 Varchola et al. [84] A2 ✓ 2nd
1st ✓ ✓
✓ 0
A-07
2012 Wenger and Großschädl [79] A2 ✓
✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D1 ✓ ✓ 0
A-09
2012 Driessen et al. [85] A5 ✓
✓ ✓ 2nd
1st 3rd D6 ✓ ✓
✓ 0
A-10
2013 Wenger [87] A2 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D2 ✓
✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 0
A-11
2013 Wenger et al. [91] A2 ✓ 2nd
1st D2 ✓ ✓ 0
A-13
2013 Wenger [80] A2 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D3 ✓
✓ ✓ 0
A-15
2013 Schramm and Grzemba [86] A2 ✓ 1st D6 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 0
A-18
2014 Azarderakhsh et al. [69] A2 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D1 ✓ ✓ 0
A-19
2014 Höller et al. [82] A2 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st
2nd D2 ✓
✓ ✓ 0
A-24
2015 Roy et al. [72] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ 3rd
2nd 1st D1 ✓ ✓ 0
A-25
2015 Koziel et al. [73] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ 2nd
1st D1 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 0
A-26
2016 Bosmans et al. [92] A2 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D1 ✓ ✓ 0
A-28
2016 Yalçin [89] A2 ✓
✓ 1st D1 ✓
✓ ✓
✓ 0
A-29
2016 Roy et al. [88] A2 ✓ 1st D1 ✓ ✓ 0
A-35
2016 Goyal and Sahula [93] A4 2nd
1st D1 ✓ ✓ 0
A-39
2017 Salman et al. [90] A2 ✓ 1st
2nd 3rd D6 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 0
A-54
2018 Järvinen [75] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 3rd
2nd 1st D1 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 0
A-03
2010 Sojka et al. [68] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D3 ✓ 1
A-05
2011 Sojka et al. [78] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D3 ✓ ✓ 1
A-08
2012 Trujillo-Olaya et al. [4] A3 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D2 ✓ ✓ 1
A-14
2013 Namal et al. [81] A4 1st
2nd D7 ✓ 1
A-17
2014 Yao et al. [41] A4 1st
3rd 2nd D7 1
A-21
2014 Liu et al. [70] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D3 1
A-22
2014 Liu et al. [14] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D3 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 1
A-23
2015 Piñol-Piñol et al. [83] A2 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D1 ✓ ✓
✓ 1
A-30
2016 Liu et al. [15] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D3 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 1
A-33
2016 Lavanya and Natarajan [46] A4 1st
2nd D1 1
A-36
2016 Liu et al. [71] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D1 ✓
✓ ✓ 1
A-38
2017 Win et al. [49] A6 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st
2nd D1 ✓ ✓ 1
A-43
2017 Khleborodov [74] A3 ✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D1 1
A-49
2017 Hasan et al. [58] A4 1st
2nd D1 ✓ ✓ 1
A-50
2017 Sojka et al. [59] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D3 ✓ ✓ 1
A-58
2018 Khleborodov [76] A3 ✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D1 1
A-01
2007 Kim et al. [36] A5 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D2 ✓ 3
A-02
2010 Kim et al. [37] A5 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D2 3
A-06
2012 Ju [38] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D3 3
A-12
2013 Bakhache et al. [39] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D7 3
A-16
2014 Druml et al. [40] A1 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st
2nd D2 ✓ ✓ 3
A-20
2014 He et al. [42] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D2 3
A-27
2016 Chaudhry et al. [43] A6 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D1 ✓ 3
A-31
2016 Reddy et al. [44] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D7 3
A-32
2016 He et al. [45] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D5 ✓ ✓ 3
A-34
2016 Kaur et al. [47] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D2 ✓ ✓ 3
A-37
2017 Zhang et al. [48] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D1 3
A-40
2017 Mathur et al. [50] A5 ✓
✓ ✓ 2nd
1st D1 ✓ 3
A-41
2017 Mahmood et al. [51] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D5 ✓ 3
A-44
2017 Badra and Zeadally [54] A6 ✓
✓ 3rd
2nd 1st D5 ✓ 3
A-46
2017 Lavanya and Natarajan [55] A5 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D1 3
A-47
2017 Meddah et al. [56] A6 ✓
✓ 1st D4 3
A-48
2017 Mohammedi et al. [57] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D4 3
A-51
2018 Shen et al. [60] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
3rd 1st D4 3
A-52
2018 Tewari et al. [61] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st 3rd D2 ✓ 3
A-56
2018 Shen et al. [64] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
3rd 1st D4 ✓ 3
A-57
2018 Mood and Nikooghadam [65] A1 ✓
✓ ✓ 3rd
1st 2nd D5 ✓ ✓ 3
A-59
2018 Almulhim and Zaman [66] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D4 3
obtained using the Circle Pack Layout in the Gephi8 tool.
For the Modularity analysis we used a Resolution of 1.0
and allowed Randomization and Weight usage. With this
analysis 19 clusters were identiﬁed. Details regarding the top
six communities are presented in Table 9. Although the table
only includes papers from the original set, the cardinality for
each group is bigger.
The ﬁrst group (Cluster 1) contains 211 elements
(12.87%). Each one of the main papers included is said to be
lightweight by proposing a Modiﬁcation to ECC (A3), almost
all have the system (B1) and algorithm (B2) abstraction
levels assigned, and all seek to improve performance as their
main goal. The set with Cluster 2 contains papers of ASIC
implementations for the most part, whereas in the set with
8https://gephi.org/
Cluster 3 are FPGA design proposals. Groups with Cluster
4, 14, 16 include a mix of protocols and software implemen-
tations with varying differences between them. For example
in Cluster 4 we can note a predilection for performance as
design goal and lower security speciﬁcations.
Centrality
In the previous analysis we focused on the degree and quality
of the connections of a node. However, in graphs there are
other metrics which can provide useful information such as
the eigenvector centrality. An analysis based on this metric
can provide a different set of relevant papers for a researcher
interested in the topic. In Fig. 20 we illustrate the reference
tree derived from an analysis making emphasis on the cen-
trality of certain nodes. The Fruchtermain-Reingold layout is
used in this case.
26 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 27 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
A-01
A-02
A-03
A-04
A-05
A-06
A-07
A-08
A-09
A-10
A-11
A-12
A-13
A-14
A-15
A-16
A-17
A-18
A-19
A-20
A-21
A-22
A-23
A-24
A-25
A-26
A-27
A-28
A-29
A-30
A-31
A-32
A-33
A-34
A-35
A-36
A-37
A-38
A-39
A-40
A-41
A-42
A-43
A-44
A-45
A-46
A-47
A-48
A-49
A-50
A-51A-52
A-53
A-54
A-55
A-56
A-57
A-58
A-59
A-60
FIGURE
19. Analysis of the surveyed papers, their references, and citations as a graph. The varying colors represent different communities.
TABLE 9. Top six clusters identiﬁed in the set of documents surveyed.
B.
Abstraction C.
Goals E.
Technology F
. SecurityID
Year Work Ref. A B1
B2 B3 B4 B5 C1
C2 C3 C4 C5 D E1
E2 E3 F1
F2 F3 Cluster
A-07
2012 Wenger and Großschädl [79] A2 ✓
✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D1 ✓ ✓ 1
A-21
2014 Liu et al. [70] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D3 1
A-22
2014 Liu et al. [14] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D3 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 1
A-23
2015 Piñol-Piñol et al. [83] A2 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D1 ✓ ✓
✓ 1
A-30
2016 Liu et al. [15] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D3 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 1
A-36
2016 Liu et al. [71] A3 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D1 ✓
✓ ✓ 1
A-08
2012 Trujillo-Olaya et al. [4] A3 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D2 ✓ ✓ 2
A-11
2013 Wenger et al. [91] A2 ✓ 2nd
1st D2 ✓ ✓ 2
A-13
2013 Wenger [80] A2 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D3 ✓
✓ ✓ 2
A-18
2014 Azarderakhsh et al. [69] A2 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D1 ✓ ✓ 2
A-24
2015 Roy et al. [72] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ 3rd
2nd 1st D1 ✓ ✓ 2
A-25
2015 Koziel et al. [73] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ 2nd
1st D1 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 2
A-26
2016 Bosmans et al. [92] A2 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D1 ✓ ✓ 2
A-54
2018 Järvinen [75] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 3rd
2nd 1st D1 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 2
A-02
2010 Kim et al. [37] A5 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D2 3
A-04
2011 Varchola et al. [84] A2 ✓ 2nd
1st ✓ ✓
✓ 3
A-09
2012 Driessen et al. [85] A5 ✓
✓ ✓ 2nd
1st 3rd D6 ✓ ✓
✓ 3
A-28
2016 Yalçin [89] A2 ✓
✓ 1st D1 ✓
✓ ✓
✓ 3
A-29
2016 Roy et al. [88] A2 ✓ 1st D1 ✓ ✓ 3
A-39
2017 Salman et al. [90] A2 ✓ 1st
2nd 3rd D6 ✓ ✓
✓ ✓ 3
A-03
2010 Sojka et al. [68] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D3 ✓ 4
A-05
2011 Sojka et al. [78] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D3 ✓ ✓ 4
A-47
2017 Meddah et al. [56] A6 ✓
✓ 1st D4 4
A-50
2017 Sojka et al. [59] A3 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st D3 ✓ ✓ 4
A-32
2016 He et al. [45] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
2nd D5 ✓ ✓ 14
A-41
2017 Mahmood et al. [51] A1 ✓
✓ 1st
3rd 2nd D5 ✓ 14
A-44
2017 Badra and Zeadally [54] A6 ✓
✓ 3rd
2nd 1st D5 ✓ 14
A-57
2018 Mood and Nikooghadam [65] A1 ✓
✓ ✓ 3rd
1st 2nd D5 ✓ ✓ 14
A-17
2014 Yao et al. [41] A4 1st
3rd 2nd D7 16
A-31
2016 Reddy et al. [44] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D7 16
A-37
2017 Zhang et al. [48] A1 ✓
✓ 2nd
1st D1 16
A-38
2017 Win et al. [49] A6 ✓
✓ ✓ 1st
2nd D1 ✓ ✓ 16
V
OLUME 4, 2016 27


===== PAGE 28 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
A-01
A-02
A-03
A-04
A-05
A-06
A-07
A-08
A-09
A-10
A-11
A-12
A-13
A-14
A-15
A-16
A-17
A-18
A-19
A-20
A-21
A-22
A-23
A-24
A-25
A-26
A-27
A-28
A-29
A-30
A-31
A-32
A-33
A-34
A-35
A-36
A-37
A-38
A-39
A-40
A-41
A-42
A-43
A-44
A-45 A-46
A-47
A-48
A-49
A-50
A-51
A-52
A-53
A-54
A-55
A-56
A-57
A-58
A-59
A-60
R-04
R-01
R-09
R-06
R-15
R-05
R-11
R-03
R-10
R-12
R-13R-14
R-08
R-07
R-02
FIGURE 20. Analysis of the surveyed papers, their references, and citations as a graph. The size and color of the nodes is determined by their centrality.
Table 10 provides the list of the publications with central-
ity scores higher than 0.3 in the provided graph.
It is true that these analyses are not ﬂawless, however, they
provide insights regarding references that might be worth
reading and related papers. Moreover, they represent a viable
option when the number of papers is big.
Keywords Detection
An easy way to review a wide set of documents is to perform
keywords or topic extraction. These techniques use text from
the papers such as the titles, the abstracts, or the whole doc-
ument to extract words which are relevant to the document.
These data can then be used to classify the documents. The
main challenge is the processing power required for big sets
of text.
A popular modern representation of the keywords of a set
of texts are the word clouds. These diagrams, as the ones
presented in Fig. 1 and Fig. 21, allow a visual representation
of the most relevant words using the font size as differentia-
tor. For the word cloud illustrated we extracted the titles of
the surveyed papers, their references, and the papers that cite
them, and used the tool WordCloud9.
C. TRENDS
By incorporating the publication and citation dates of the sur-
veyed works to the reference analysis it is possible to observe
9https://pypi.python.org/pypi/wordcloud
28 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 29 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
FIGURE
22. Publications per year in the last 20 years. Includes the papers surveyed, their references, and their citations.
TABLE 10. Documents with the higher Eigenvector Centrality (> 0.3) in the
dataset of surveyed documents, their references, and the papers that cite
them.
ID
Year Work Ref Centrality
R-01
2004 Hankerson et al. [12] 1.000000
R-02
2004 Gura et al. [94] 0.654960
R-03
2008 Szczechowiak et al. [95] 0.524719
R-04
1987 Montgomery [96] 0.518480
R-05
2008 Liu and Ning [97] 0.502248
R-06
2012 Großschädl et al. [98] 0.379274
R-07
2006 Wang and Li [99] 0.379274
R-08
1988 Itoh and Tsujii [100] 0.377328
A-22
2014 Liu et al. [14] 0.375931
R-09
2012 Cohen et al. [10] 0.328163
R-10
2009 Hein et al. [101] 0.321392
R-11
1985 Montgomery [102] 0.312420
R-12
2003 Großschädl et al. [103] 0.304679
R-13
2009 Lederer et al. [11] 0.304679
R-14
2009 Ugus et al. [104] 0.304679
R-15
2008 Hisil et al. [105] 0.303745
FIGURE
21. Word cloud generated with the abstracts of the surveyed papers.
The size of each word is determined by its frequency in the source text.
FIGURE 23. Publications per year of the surveyed papers.
trends in regards to the number of documents published, and
the number of citations.
Considering the set of documents surveyed, their refer-
ences, and their citations, Fig. 22 illustrates the number of
papers per year of publication. A simple analysis of the data
shows that the tendency is exponential, as given by
f (t) = 1.83 × 10−110e0.1278t. (33)
If we focus on the surveyed papers only we can identify as
similar behavior, as illustrated in Fig. 23. With limited data
it is difﬁcult to determine whether the growth tendency can
be kept or if the number of related publications will become
stagnant over the time. For now it appears that there is a
growing interest surrounding ECLC and related ﬁelds. This
is expected to go hand in hand with the development of IoT
and its evolving security requirements. This behavior follows
the distribution
f (t) = 4.471 × 10−248e0.2837t. (34)
A similar behavior is observed in the distribution of the
citations to the surveyed papers per year. This is illustrated
in Fig. 24. This plot reveals that the interest in ECLC has
VOLUME 4, 2016 29


===== PAGE 30 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
FIGURE 24. Citations per year to the surveyed papers.
2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Citations
References
Publication year
FIGURE 25. Citations to each surveyed paper. The color code indicates the
number of references made by the paper.
sparkled in the last ﬁve years. The rapid growth can be as-
sociated to the consolidation of IoT and related technologies.
The projection shown in Fig. 24 is represented by the model
f (t) = e 0.6474t−1301. (35)
If we study the citations to the surveyed papers in a
case by case basis, it is possible to notice that there is no
apparent relation in the number of citations with the year of
publication. This analysis is presented in Fig. 25. A color
code was included in the plot to showcase the number of
references made by a paper. As it can be noted, it seems that
there exists a relation between the number of publications
references and the number of citations received.
VII. ECLC TAXONOMY AND APPLICATIONS
The advantages of ECLC over traditional asymmetric cryp-
tography alternatives are clear: smaller key sizes, improved
security, and ﬂexibility, all inherited from ECC. When these
are coupled with resource awareness and implementation
efﬁciency, attractive solutions can be obtained. Being able
to provide critical security services in constrained networked
environments, without the drawbacks of conventional sym-
metric solutions, is the most important feature of ECLC.
The limitations steam from the novelty of the area. The
main problems are the complexity in the design of ECLC
solutions, the lack of interoperability, and the possibility
of new vulnerabilities being discovered. All these can be
addressed as long as there is a community interested on
researching the ﬁeld and new elliptic curves are proposed.
Fig. 26 illustrates ECLC as function of the different char-
acteristics retrieved from the papers. In this diagram we have
included the three main reasons for deﬁning a proposal as
lightweight, the ﬁve abstraction levels, and the most impor-
tant design goal for each work. In total 57% of the surveyed
works are included in this representation.
From the surveyed data it can be appreciated how it is
usually the case that ECLC solutions ﬁrst try to meet the
performance and security requirements of the application.
Reducing resource and bandwidth usages are often secondary
goals. From our experience, achieving high performance
and security are critical for any security system. However,
reducing resource usage (which impacts production costs)
and energy consumption (which impacts devices lifetime) are
key factors in fomenting the adoption of emerging technolo-
gies. Carefully constructed trade-offs between performance,
security, hardware resources, and energy are undoubtedly im-
portant. In the next section we provide strategies for creating
ECLC systems.
From Tables 2 through 6 we can identify some state of the
art uses of ECLC. Providing conﬁdentiality, integrity, authen-
tication, and key establishment, through means of encryption,
signatures, key agreement, and authentication protocols are
common use cases. The technologies where these are found
include:
• IoT [43], [46], [48]–[50], [52], [55], [58]
• WSN [38], [48], [59]
• RFID [36], [37], [40], [42], [47], [61]
• e-Health [57], [60], [60], [63], [66], [67]
• Smart Grid [45], [51], [54], [65]
These instances exemplify the potential for ECLC for sev-
eral technologies which are perceived to become dominant
in the near future [106]. Ensuring that our information is safe
under these constrained applications is the purpose of ECLC.
VIII. STRATEGIES TO CONSTRUCT ECLC-BASED
SOLUTIONS
We propose that the steps to follow for constructing an
ECLC design and implementation process should match the
abstraction levels presented in this survey. For the System
level we have deﬁned steps VIII-A to VIII-C. The Protocol
level is reﬂected in step VIII-D. The steps VIII-E trough
VIII-G are associated with the Algorithm abstraction level.
Finally the levels Architecture and Circuit are grouped in step
VIII-H.
30 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 31 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
ECLC
A1
A2
A3
B1
B2
B3
B1
B3
B4
B5
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
C1
C3
C3
C1
C3
C1
C1 C2
C1
C2 C3
C1
C2
C3
C1
C2
C3
C1
C3
C1
C2
A-06
A-12A-16
A-20
A-32
A-41A-48
A-51
A-31
A-34
A-37
A-52
A-56
A-57
A-59
A-37 A-52
A-56 A-57
A-59
A-16
A-31
A-34
A-57
A-23
A-07A-19
A-23
A-18
A-07
A-10
A-19
A-39
A-04
A-13
A-15
A-18
A-28
A-29
A-11
A-26
A-10
A-19
A-13
A-18
A-28
A-26
A-03
A-05
A-21
A-22
A-30
A-36
A-50
A-08
A-25
A-24
A-54
A-03
A-05
A-50
A-54
A-03
A-05
A-21
A-22
A-30
A-36
A-43
A-50
A-58
A-25
FIGURE
26. Taxonomy of ECLC. Only the most representative characteristics are included for visualization purposes.
A. IDENTIFY THE PROBLEM
The ﬁrst step requires to clearly deﬁning the problem and se-
curity requirements. Based on this deﬁnition a set of security
services can be proposed to provide protection for the system.
Some of the most popular services from asymmetric cryptog-
raphy are authentication, key establishment, and signatures.
Some works which clearly deﬁne the problem are those
that target speciﬁcally RFID [42], WSN [38], healthcare [57],
among others. By knowing the problem, the required security
services are deﬁned.
B. DETERMINE THE IMPLEMENTATION PLATFORM
It is also important to identify the target implementation
platform (the device) and identify the application constraints.
It should ﬁrst be deﬁned if the implementation will be in
hardware or in software. For the former, select the imple-
mentation technology: FPGA, ASIC or a different system and
study the hardware resources available in each case. For the
latter, select a processor and study its architecture, its register
width, the operations supported, and the memory availability.
From the literature review, some works that target WSN
motes are [50], [107]. These proposals have identiﬁed their
implementation platform and designed their solution in such
a way that it was useful for such platform. In the case
of hardware, works like [88] and [89] have designed their
solutions according to the features of the selected platform.
C. IDENTIFY THE SYSTEM CONSTRAINTS
Depending on the speciﬁcations and features of the devices
some operational constraints can be drawn. Others come
from standards and norms if the system is to be compliant
with any regulations such as IEEE 802, ISO/IEC 14443, FIPS
PUB 200, ISO/IEC 29182, among others. In general terms all
limited devices share similar constraints, but the application
may determine that some are more critical than others.
Take as example the proposals in [59], [68], [78] and [4]
where the authors take into account the application scope in
order to deﬁne the security features of the solution. This idea
should not be limited to the security aspects of the proposal,
however, but also to the technical requirements of the system
as in [40] and [50].
D. SELECT A PROTOCOL TO SOL VE THE PROBLEM
For most of the problems pertinent to networked environ-
ments general solutions are available in the literature. It is
recommended, however, to construct an ad hoc protocol for
the application scope. In this step the goal is to choose the
protocol algorithm in general terms. This selection should
account for the security services to be provided, which steam
from the problem to be solved. Some of the most popular
protocols include variants of ECDH, ECDSA, EC-ElGamal,
ECIES, COAP and IKE.
E. SELECT THE DOMAIN P ARAMETERS OF THE
ELLIPTIC CURVE
Determine the ECC to be used with the protocol speciﬁed
to provide security services for the system. Select the tuple
of domain parameters D = {Fq,E,P,n} as speciﬁed in
Section II-D.
The most common ﬁelds Fq to be utilized are the prime
ﬁeld or the binary ﬁeld. The former being more efﬁcient
in software whereas the latter are preferred in hardware
implementations. Current standards (NIST, IEEE, SEC, ...)
recommend speciﬁc ﬁelds for security reasons. In the case of
the prime ﬁeld, it is deﬁned by a primep. In the case of the
binary ﬁeld, an irreducible polynomial F (x) deﬁnes it. The
VOLUME 4, 2016 31


===== PAGE 32 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
length in bits of p or the degree of F (x) must be compliant
with the standards to meet a speciﬁc security level.
In the prime ﬁelds there are different elliptic curve
families: random, Koblitz, Montgomery, Edwards, Twisted-
Edwards, and most recently MoTE. For binary ﬁelds there
are some other families: binary random, binary Koblitz,
binary Edwards, and Hessian. Each one of these is a set of
constructions denominated family, which contains curves for
ﬁelds of different length. These were discussed in more detail
in Section II-B.
The coefﬁcients for each curve model are also deﬁned for
each instance. The generator or base point for an elliptic
curve is provided with the speciﬁcation, and some have
multiple generators.
These values should be selected in a way that allows to
achieve advantages in the implementation of the cryptosys-
tem for the target platform.
The contribution in [71] provides a good example of a clear
description of domain parameters, designed for constrained
environments, which are said to come from a “family of
lightweight elliptic curves” (the MoTE curves). We shall use
the MoTE curve P159 as case study:
• Field. The selected ﬁeld is the prime ﬁeldFp where
p = 2 159 − 91. (36)
The length of p is 159 bits, therefore the expected
security of this curve is 80-bit.
• Curve. The curve is deﬁned through the Montgomery
model
EM :By 2 =x3 +Ax2 +x (37)
where
A = 3191566 and B = −3191568. (38)
Since this is a MoTE curve, it is birationally equivalent
to the Edwards curve given by
ET : −x2 +y2 = 1 +dx2y2 (39)
where
d = 837225916393474870456 /
08834894170521976562663492. (40)
• Generator. Since the elliptic curve group is cyclic, any
point in the curve can be a generator of the curve.
• Order. The order reported for the curve is 4l <p where
l is a prime smaller than 2157.
• Co-factor The curve has a co-factor of 4.
The ﬁrst two parameters enumerated are mandatory in
order to establish a system which is based on the curve
speciﬁed. The generator is required in order to establish
security protocols with additional parties, the difference with
the ﬁrst two parameters is that the generator can vary across
instances of the security system. The last two parameters are
related with the security of the system; these are not required
for the system to work however it is important to report them
for security auditing.
F . DEFINE THE POINT REPRESENTATION
As presented in Section II-B, points on an elliptic curve group
E(Fq) can have multiple representations which have different
characteristics. Derivations from the afﬁne representation
such as the projective coordinates, the w coordinates, the λ
coordinates, and combinations of these can represent inter-
esting alternatives for an elliptic curve system. For ECLC
systems the mixed coordinate systems offer attractive advan-
tages in reducing some of the operations required, such as
inversions, and if paired with strategies like Co-Z, it is pos-
sible to reduce the storage requirements. Selecting different
coordinate representations usually implies modiﬁcations to
the group operations and a direct impact on the number and
type of Fq operations.
The work in [73] proposes to use w coordinates to repre-
sent the elliptic curve points. In that work,w coordinates are
ﬁrst used to reduce the number of ﬁeld operations required in
the group operations. A mixed system withw and projective-
w was implemented in order to reduce the number of ﬁeld
inversions required. The Co-Z strategy is also exploited in
order to further reduce the operations count and the storage
requirements of their solution.
G. CHOOSE THE ARITHMETIC
Once the elliptic curve to be used has been deﬁned and
the implementation technology is known, it is necessary to
do the actual data processing. ECC relies on the group and
ﬁeld operations described in Section II-B. It is important
to determine the most suitable alternatives to perform the
group and ﬁeld operations. This suitability is determined by
the elliptic curve, the point representation, and ﬁnite ﬁeld
selected.
As mentioned, at group level the most important opera-
tion is the scalar multiplication. Some of the most popular
alternatives to perform this calculation include the Double
and Add method, Comb methods, NAF method, and the
Montgomery Powering Ladder [12]. Whereas some of these
focus on efﬁciency by performing the minimal number of
operations required, others such as the Montgomery Ladder
seek regularity in the processing of the data to prevent infor-
mation leakage.
The scalar multiplication relies on point addition and point
doubling. Through adequate selection of the point represen-
tation and for speciﬁc ﬁelds and curves, these operations
can be optimized. Reducing the number of ﬁeld operations,
discarding complex ﬁeld operations from the processing,
reducing the diversity of ﬁeld operations required, and miti-
gating duplicated calculations are all possible goals for these
optimizations.
The ﬁeld algorithms required by the group operations
should be determined by the implementation system and the
ﬁeld selection. If the application constraints demand it, then
performance should be prioritized in the ﬁeld realizations
used. For software systems, the availability depends on the
instructions supported by the processor. In the case of hard-
32 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 33 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
ware the limitations are physical since the resources tend to
be restricted.
In some works like [86], the scalar multiplication would
be performed using naïve approaches such as the Double and
Add method. This procedure, however, has the disadvantage
that it takes decisional branches which depend on the data
utilized. This information leakage can be used to retrieve
the secret key and compromise the system. More recent
proposals, like [15], rely on the Montgomery ladder since
it performs on constant time and mitigates the information
leakage. This scalar multiplication method has also been
used to construct more efﬁcient group operations like the
differential addition and doubling proposed in [73].
H. DEFINE THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES
By implementation we refer to taking the algorithmic de-
scription of the solution and mapping it to a physical real-
ization. This can be achieved through the use of a processor,
a reconﬁgurable device, or an integrated circuit. For each
of these options the implementation strategies are different.
Hence it is important to identify the underlying implementa-
tion technology.
According to the target platform each algorithm can be
implemented in multiple ways. For constrained environments
though, it is mandatory to address the restrictions of the sys-
tem. Power availability, clocking frequency, maximum delay,
and memory are generic constraints that can be observed for
any technology. Speciﬁcally in processors, the stack size, the
operations supported, the register width, and the RAM are
related constraints. For hardware, physical size and generics
availability are important factors. The software or hardware
speciﬁcation of the solution ought to be designed respecting
these physical constraints.
Furthermore, the design goals can also inﬂuence the im-
plementation. Once the ECLC design is suitable for the
target platform, additional considerations can be taken into
account in order to align the design with speciﬁc goals. A
performance oriented implementation will be substantially
different from an area optimized core, even if both perform
the same task. The implementation strategies are determined
ﬁrst by the constraints of the system, and then by the design
goals.
Papers like [15], [88], [89] provide detailed explanations
of their implementation strategies which may help the reader
to further understand the design principles in ECLC.
I. SECTION REMARKS
The application of this procedure can ease the need to re-
search the different steps that must be taken in the design
of an ECLC solution. By using this method, a researcher
would instead focus on a speciﬁc set of steps in order to
achieve an ad hoc solution. Having broad knowledge of the
problem, the target technology, and the system constraints
can be considered as background data that should be speciﬁed
when a project is started. Addressing the protocol, domain
parameters, representation, and arithmetic can be considered
sufﬁcient to obtain a complete speciﬁcation of the solution,
in a theoretical sense. The implementation strategies are what
shall consolidate the idea.
IX. OPEN PROBLEMS AND FUTURE TRENDS
There are multiple challenges that must be overcome in order
to make use of ECLC in constrained devices. First and fore-
most, even though the performance and implementation sizes
of ECLC systems outperforms other asymmetric techniques,
they still fall behind symmetric solutions. Lightweight sym-
metric ciphers and hash functions can achieve implemen-
tation sizes and latencies at least one order of magnitude
smaller than those of ECLC. This restrains the use of ECLC
systems from providing security services such as bulk en-
cryption and authentication. Instead, ECLC solutions are
pivotal in key establishment and the use of digital signatures.
But these applications must observe the lengthy latencies and
the hardware/processing overhead. In order to improve the
quality of the services provided by ECLC, further research
must be conducted to reduce the latency and implementation
size of these solutions.
Another important challenge is associated with informa-
tion security. As the development of new elliptic curves and
processing techniques progresses, the attack models are also
improved. Mathematical, cybernetic, and physical attacks are
a threat to any security system. However, the challenge is
greater if we consider the application scope of ECLC. Provid-
ing additional security measures generally represents signif-
icant security overheads. It is often the case that constrained
environments cannot afford additional security protections.
From the mathematical point of view, new algorithms can
reduce the complexity of certain instances of ECDLP [108].
This leads to requiring increased key sizes or different fami-
lies of curves. In that case the efﬁciency of the solution can be
reduced. Cybernetic attacks are those that reach their targets
over the internet. These protections are easier to account
for as usually network-wide protections are put in place by
a gateway. Finally, attacks which have direct access to the
network are the most challenging to deal with. Constrained
systems often are deployed in unsupervised environments
and in high density. Multiple attacks can be performed with
different goals and it is practically impossible to provide pro-
tections for every possible scenario. ECLC implementations
must then consider that a device can be captured so it should
not rely on nonvolatile information.
Standardization also hurts ECLC. Current standards are
outdated in regards to the application scope. When the orig-
inal suites were proposed, lightweight cryptography was not
yet consolidated. Thus NIST and Sec standards only include
general application curves. Novel efﬁcient elliptic curves
have been proposed but there is not a suite which includes
them. This lack of standardization limits their usage. If multi-
ple systems do not support these new curves, interoperability
problems might arise. This problem also brings security risks.
Since there is not any suite using modern elliptic curves,
these will not get exposed to enough public scrutiny. More
VOLUME 4, 2016 33


===== PAGE 34 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
involvement of the community could help identifying risks
and optimization opportunities.
In recent years, the idea that quantum computers will be
a reality in the next decades has gained support. As NIST
points out, many scientists now believe that the creation of
practical quantum computers is merely a signiﬁcant engi-
neering challenge [109]. Some authors go as far as to state
that within the next 20 years or so quantum computers,
sufﬁciently large to present a threat to modern cryptography,
will be built [110]. In 1994 Peter Shor discovered an algo-
rithm capable of factoring numbers in polynomial time on a
quantum computer, along with another to compute discrete
logarithms. In a practical approach, this implies that tradi-
tional cryptographic primitives that rely on such problems
can be broken by a quantum computer which is large enough.
The possibility of the creation of a such quantum computer
capable of running Shor’s algorithm would represent the
demise of any PKC system which relies on IF, DLP, and
ECDLP as we know it.
In a Post-Quantum setting, Elliptic Curve based cryptog-
raphy would be unable to rely on the hardness of ECDLP.
However, the isogenies in super-singular curves [111] has
been proposed as a different NP-hard problem which enables
cryptographic constructions based on elliptic curves. The
isogenies problem on super-singular curves has no quantum
attack known, but there has not been enough analysis on
their security [109]. This new variant of ECC would need
to be adapted for constrained environments thus preserving
the essence of ECLC.
X. CONCLUSIONS AND FINAL REMARKS
In this survey we have determined the criteria that make an
ECC-based solution lightweight and viable for use in prac-
tical constrained applications. Representative works were
systematically revised to determine the key aspects in an
ECC design that lead to lightweight realizations. As a result,
this paper provided for the ﬁrst time the concept and require-
ments for Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography (ECLC).
We designed and described a methodology to create ECLC
systems. We also discussed the open challenges that must be
addressed by these systems. From the surveyed data we can
answer the questions raised in the problem statement.
If there are proposals of elliptic curves designed to ﬁt the
needs of constrained devices, is it possible to call such curves
as lightweight? Or is this adjective more associated with
implementations of these systems?
In our study we found out that 48% of the surveyed papers
were not implemented. This implies that it is possible to
denominate a proposal as “lightweight” even when there is
not implementation data to back this statement. Nonetheless,
from our proposed methodology, we suggest that such works
must observe the higher abstraction levels of System, Proto-
col, or Algorithm, in order to create a solution which can be
useful for constrained environments.
If the elliptic curves are not standardized, will there be any
traction on implementing them?
Multiple surveyed works were developed for nonstandard-
ized elliptic curves. This leads us to believe that there is
certain interest in the use of constructions which prove to
be advantageous for the application. However, if modern,
efﬁcient curves were included in a standard for lightweight
cryptography it would deﬁnitely help improving the auditing
and optimization process for these systems. This would also
contribute to spread their use.
What are the guidelines to determine if an ECC-based
design or solution is lightweight?
The abstraction levels outlined in this survey can serve as a
guideline for this purpose. This method relies on identifying
if the solution was designed with modiﬁcations in regards
to the implementation system, at the level of protocols,
algorithms, architectures, or circuits, in aims to tailor it for
constrained environments. It is desirable that these decisions
can be backed up with implementation data, but as mentioned
before, it is not a requirement. We found a recurring mistake
found in the identiﬁcation of why each one of the surveyed
works is denominated lightweight. This was the miscon-
ception that replacing traditional PKC (RSA) with generic
ECC can lead to lightweight implementations. It is indeed
true that such works might be more suitable for constrained
environments than the state of the art in PKC. However, true
ECLC solutions are those that satisfy the deﬁnition provide
in this work: ﬁrst to select ECC and then to considerer several
aspect for its efﬁcient implementation in constrained devices.
What can be denominated ECLC? Is this concept utilized
in the literature? Or is the word “lightweight” ever associ-
ated with ECC proposals/implementations?
We came to deﬁne ECLC as the set of elliptic curve
protocols, domain parameters, algorithms, and implementa-
tion techniques, designed to provide security in constrained
environments. All the surveyed works were denominated
“lightweight” in the paper or related media. However, no one
analyzes or supports the use of that adjective. We identiﬁed
that the main difference with traditional lightweight cryp-
tography is that ECLC ﬁrst tries to address the performance
constraints of the system to then pursue other objectives.
There are multiple threats that can compromise the secu-
rity of ECLC systems. However, this technology offers great
opportunities for the development of new systems such as
IoT. The development of new networked environments will
require strong security primitives which are efﬁcient and
represent small overheads for the device. This is a role that
ECLC, with any of its different variants, can fulﬁll.
A. FUTURE WORK
Some directions that we would like to explore in the near
future include: studying the implications of quantum attacks
on the security of constrained devices; exploring the state of
the art for other PKC solutions in the context of lightweight
cryptography; construct benchmarks using commercial de-
vices in order to compare the multiple solutions available
under fair conditions.
34 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 35 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
REFERENCES
[1] K. A. McKay, L. Bassham, M. S. Turan, and N. Mouha, “Report on
Lightweight Cryptography,” Tech. Rep. NISTIR 8114, National Institute
of Standards and Technology, march 2017. [DOI] https://doi.org/10.
6028/NIST.IR.8114.
[2] “ISO/IEC 29192-2:2012.” Information technology – Security techniques
– Lightweight cryptography – Part 2: Block ciphers, Jan 2012.
[3] NIST, “NIST Special Publication 800-57. Part 1. Revision 4. Recommen-
dation for Key Management.” [Online] http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/
SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-57pt1r4.pdf, 2016. [Last access] 10-
10-2018.
[4] V . Trujillo-Olaya, T. Sherwood, and Ç. K. Koç, “Analysis of performance
versus security in hardware realizations of small elliptic curves for
lightweight applications,” Journal of Cryptographic Engineering, vol. 2,
no. 3, pp. 179–188, 2012.
[5] B. Rashidi, “A Survey on Hardware Implementations of Elliptic Curve
Cryptosystems,” tech. rep., 2017. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1710.08336.pdf.
[6] G. M. de Dormale and J.-J. Quisquater, “High-speed hardware implemen-
tations of Elliptic Curve Cryptography: A survey,” Journal of Systems
Architecture, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 72 – 84, 2007. Embedded Hardware for
Cryptosystems.
[7] S. Kalra and S. K. Sood, “Elliptic Curve Cryptography: Survey and Its
Security Applications,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Advances in Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, ACAI ’11, (New
York, NY , USA), pp. 102–106, ACM, 2011.
[8] S. M. Sakharkar, R. S. Mangrulkar, and M. Atique, “A survey: A secure
routing method for detecting false reports and gray-hole attacks along
with Elliptic Curve Cryptography in wireless sensor networks,” in 2014
IEEE Students’ Conference on Electrical, Electronics and Computer
Science, pp. 1–5, March 2014.
[9] R. Harkanson and Y . Kim, “Applications of Elliptic Curve Cryptog-
raphy: A Light Introduction to Elliptic Curves and a Survey of Their
Applications,” in Proceedings of the 12th Annual Conference on Cyber
and Information Security Research, CISRC ’17, (New York, NY , USA),
pp. 6:1–6:7, ACM, 2017.
[10] H. Cohen, G. Frey, R. Avanzi, C. Doche, T. Lange, K. Nguyen, and F. Ver-
cauteren, Handbook of Elliptic and Hyperelliptic Curve Cryptography,
Second Edition. Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2nd ed., 2012.
[11] C. Lederer, R. Mader, M. Koschuch, J. Großschädl, A. Szekely, and
S. Tillich, “Energy-Efﬁcient Implementation of ECDH Key Exchange
for Wireless Sensor Networks,” in Proceedings of the 3rd IFIP WG 11.2
International Workshop on Information Security Theory and Practice.
Smart Devices, Pervasive Systems, and Ubiquitous Networks, WISTP
’09, (Berlin, Heidelberg), pp. 112–127, Springer-Verlag, 2009.
[12] D. Hankerson, A. J. Menezes, and S. Vanstone, Guide to Elliptic Curve
Cryptography. Secaucus, NJ, USA: Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.,
2003.
[13] D. J. Bernstein, T. Lange, and R. R. Farashahi, “Binary Edwards Curves,”
CHES 2008. LNCS, vol. 5154, pp. 244–265, 2008.
[14] Z. Liu, E. Wenger, and J. Großschädl, MoTE-ECC: Energy-Scalable
Elliptic Curve Cryptography for Wireless Sensor Networks, pp. 361–379.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2014.
[15] Z. Liu, J. Weng, Z. Hu, and H. Seo, “Efﬁcient Elliptic Curve Cryptogra-
phy for Embedded Devices,” ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst., vol. 16,
pp. 53:1–53:18, Dec. 2016.
[16] H. C. A. Tilborg and S. Jajodia, Encyclopedia of Cryptography and
Security. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2nd ed., 2011.
[17] W. Difﬁe and M. Hellman, “New directions in cryptography,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 22, pp. 644–654, Nov 1976.
[18] A. J. Menezes, S. A. Vanstone, and P. C. V . Oorschot, Handbook of
Applied Cryptography. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, Inc., 1st ed.,
1996.
[19] N. Koblitz, “Elliptic curve cryptosystems,” Mathematics of Computation,
vol. 48, no. 177, pp. 203–209, 1987.
[20] D. Beaver, S. Micali, and P. Rogaway, “The Round Complexity of
Secure Protocols,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-second Annual ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’90, (New York, NY , USA),
pp. 503–513, ACM, 1990.
[21] M. Bellare, V . T. Hoang, and P. Rogaway, “Foundations of Garbled
Circuits,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, CCS ’12, (New York, NY , USA), pp. 784–
796, ACM, 2012.
[22] R. L. Rivest, L. Adleman, and M. L. Dertouzos, “On Data Banks and Pri-
vacy Homomorphisms,” Foundations of Secure Computation, Academia
Press, pp. 169–179, 1978.
[23] A. Lopez-Alt, E. Tromer, and V . Vaikuntanathan, “On-the-Fly Multiparty
Computation on the Cloud via Multikey Fully Homomorphic Encryp-
tion,” tech. rep., 2013. https://eprint.iacr.org/2013/094.
[24] J. Alperin-Sheriff and C. Peikert, “Faster Bootstrapping with Polynomial
Error,” tech. rep., 2014. https://eprint.iacr.org/2014/094.
[25] C. Peikert, A Decade of Lattice Cryptography. now, 2016.
[26] C. Peikert, “Lattice cryptography for the internet,” in Post-Quantum
Cryptography (M. Mosca, ed.), (Cham), pp. 197–219, Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2014.
[27] R. Overbeck and N. Sendrier, Code-based cryptography, pp. 95–145.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
[28] A. Shamir, “Identity-Based Cryptosystems and Signature Schemes,” in
Advances in Cryptology (G. R. Blakley and D. Chaum, eds.), (Berlin,
Heidelberg), pp. 47–53, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1985.
[29] S. Chatterjee and P. Sarkar, Identity-Based Encryption. Springer Publish-
ing Company, Incorporated, 1st ed., 2011.
[30] A. Sahai and B. Waters, “Fuzzy Identity-based Encryption,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 24th Annual International Conference on Theory and
Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, EUROCRYPT’05, (Berlin,
Heidelberg), pp. 457–473, Springer-Verlag, 2005.
[31] X. Chen, K. Choi, and K. Chae, “A Secure and Efﬁcient Key Authentica-
tion using Bilinear Pairing for NFC Mobile Payment Service,” Wireless
Personal Communications, vol. 97, pp. 1–17, Nov 2017.
[32] F. Guo, Y . Mu, W. Susilo, H. Hsing, D. S. Wong, and V . Varadhara-
jan, “Optimized Identity-Based Encryption from Bilinear Pairing for
Lightweight Devices,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing, vol. 14, pp. 211–220, March 2017.
[33] K. T. Nguyen, N. Oualha, and M. Laurent, “Securely outsourcing the
ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption,” World Wide Web, vol. 21,
pp. 169–183, Jan 2018.
[34] X. Yao, Z. Chen, and Y . Tian, “A Lightweight Attribute-based Encryption
Scheme for the Internet of Things,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 49,
pp. 104–112, Aug. 2015.
[35] J. Fan, O. Reparaz, V . Roži ´c, and I. Verbauwhede, “Low-energy encryp-
tion for medical devices: Security adds an extra design dimension,” in
2013 50th ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC),
pp. 1–6, May 2013.
[36] S. Kim, Y . Kim, and S. Park, “RFID Security Protocol by Lightweight
ECC Algorithm,” in Sixth International Conference on Advanced Lan-
guage Processing and Web Information Technology (ALPIT 2007),
pp. 323–328, Aug 2007.
[37] C. J. Kim, S. Y . Yun, and S. C. Park, “A Lightweight ECC Algorithm
for Mobile RFID Service,” in 2010 Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Ubiquitous Information Technologies and Applications,
pp. 1–6, Dec 2010.
[38] S. Ju, “A lightweight key establishment in wireless sensor network based
on elliptic curve cryptography,” in 2012 IEEE International Conference
on Intelligent Control, Automatic Detection and High-End Equipment,
pp. 138–141, July 2012.
[39] B. Bakhache, E. El-Hamawi, and H. Houssain, “Fast and secure key
agreement protocol for the security of low power wireless networks,” in
2013 IEEE Faible Tension Faible Consommation, pp. 1–4, June 2013.
[40] N. Druml, M. Menghin, A. Kuleta, C. Steger, R. Weiss, H. Bock,
and J. Haid, “A Flexible and Lightweight ECC-Based Authentication
Solution for Resource Constrained Systems,” in 2014 17th Euromicro
Conference on Digital System Design, pp. 372–378, Aug 2014.
[41] X. Yao, X. Han, and X. Du, “A light-weight certiﬁcate-less public key
cryptography scheme based on ECC,” in 2014 23rd International Con-
ference on Computer Communication and Networks (ICCCN), pp. 1–8,
Aug 2014.
[42] D. He, N. Kumar, N. Chilamkurti, and J.-H. Lee, “Lightweight ECC
Based RFID Authentication Integrated with an ID Veriﬁer Transfer
Protocol,” Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 38, no. 10, p. 116, 2014.
[43] S. A. Chaudhry, H. Naqvi, K. Mahmood, H. F. Ahmad, and M. K. Khan,
“An Improved Remote User Authentication Scheme Using Elliptic Curve
Cryptography,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 96, pp. 5355–
5373, Oct 2017.
[44] A. G. Reddy, E. J. Yoon, A. K. Das, and K. Y . Yoo, “Lightweight authen-
tication with key-agreement protocol for mobile network environment
using smart cards,” IET Information Security, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 272–282,
2016.
VOLUME 4, 2016 35


===== PAGE 36 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
[45] D. He, H. Wang, M. K. Khan, and L. Wang, “Lightweight anonymous key
distribution scheme for smart grid using elliptic curve cryptography,” IET
Communications, vol. 10, no. 14, pp. 1795–1802, 2016.
[46] Lavanya and Natarajan, “Lightweight Authentication for COAP Based
IOT,” in Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on the Internet
of Things, IoT’16, (New York, NY , USA), pp. 167–168, ACM, 2016.
[47] K. Kaur, N. Kumar, M. Singh, and M. S. Obaidat, “Lightweight Authen-
tication Protocol for RFID-Enabled Systems Based on ECC,” in 2016
IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 1–6, Dec
2016.
[48] W. Zhang, D. Lin, H. Zhang, C. Chen, and X. Zhou, “A Lightweight
Anonymous Mutual Authentication with Key Agreement Protocol on
ECC,” in 2017 IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, pp. 170–176, Aug
2017.
[49] E. K. Win, T. Yoshihisa, Y . Ishi, T. Kawakami, Y . Teranishi, and S. Shi-
mojo, “A Lightweight Multi-receiver Encryption Scheme with Mutual
Authentication,” in 2017 IEEE 41st Annual Computer Software and
Applications Conference (COMPSAC), vol. 2, pp. 491–497, July 2017.
[50] A. Mathur, T. Newe, W. Elgenaidi, M. Rao, G. Dooly, and D. Toal,
“A secure end-to-end IoT solution,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical,
vol. 263, no. Supplement C, pp. 291 – 299, 2017.
[51] K. Mahmood, S. A. Chaudhry, H. Naqvi, S. Kumari, X. Li, and A. K.
Sangaiah, “An elliptic curve cryptography based lightweight authentica-
tion scheme for smart grid communication,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, 2017.
[52] A. A. Diro, N. Chilamkurti, and P. Veeraraghavan, Elliptic Curve
Based Cybersecurity Schemes for Publish-Subscribe Internet of Things,
pp. 258–268. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017.
[53] A. A. Diro, N. Chilamkurti, and N. Kumar, “Lightweight Cybersecurity
Schemes Using Elliptic Curve Cryptography in Publish-Subscribe Fog
Computing,” Mob. Netw. Appl., vol. 22, pp. 848–858, Oct. 2017.
[54] M. Badra and S. Zeadally, “Lightweight and efﬁcient privacy-preserving
data aggregation approach for the Smart Grid,” Ad Hoc Networks,
vol. 64, no. Supplement C, pp. 32 – 40, 2017.
[55] M. Lavanya and V . Natarajan, “Lightweight key agreement protocol for
IoT based on IKEv2,” Computers & Electrical Engineering, vol. 64,
no. Supplement C, pp. 580 – 594, 2017.
[56] N. Meddah, A. Jebrane, and A. Toumanari, Scalable Lightweight ABAC
Scheme for Secure Sharing PHR in Cloud Computing, pp. 333–346.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018.
[57] M. Mohammedi, M. Omar, and A. Bouabdallah, “Secure and lightweight
remote patient authentication scheme with biometric inputs for mobile
healthcare environments,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Human-
ized Computing, Sep 2017.
[58] H. Hasan, T. Salah, D. Shehada, M. J. Zemerly, C. Y . Yeun, M. Al-
Qutayri, and Y . Al-Hammadi, “Secure lightweight ECC-based protocol
for multi-agent IoT systems,” in 2017 IEEE 13th International Confer-
ence on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communica-
tions (WiMob), pp. 1–8, Oct 2017.
[59] A. Sojka-Piotrowska and P. Langendoerfer, “Shortening the Security Pa-
rameters in Lightweight WSN Applications for IoT - Lessons Learned,”
in 2ND IEEE PERCOM WORKSHOP ON SECURITY PRIV ACY AND
TRUST IN THE INTERNET OF THINGS, March 2017.
[60] J. Shen, S. Chang, J. Shen, Q. Liu, and X. Sun, “A lightweight multi-
layer authentication protocol for wireless body area networks,” Future
Generation Computer Systems, vol. 78, no. Part 3, pp. 956 – 963, 2018.
[61] A. Tewari and B. B. Gupta, “A robust anonymity preserving authentica-
tion protocol for IoT devices,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Consumer Electronics (ICCE), pp. 1–5, Jan 2018.
[62] A. A. Diro, N. Chilamkurti, and Y . Nam, “Analysis of Lightweight
Encryption Scheme for Fog-to-Things Communication,” IEEE Access,
vol. 6, pp. 26820–26830, 2018.
[63] A. Vaniprabha and P. Poongodi, “Augmented lightweight security scheme
with access control model for wireless medical sensor networks,” Cluster
Computing, Jan 2018.
[64] J. Shen, Z. Gui, S. Ji, J. Shen, H. Tan, and Y . Tang, “Cloud-aided
lightweight certiﬁcateless authentication protocol with anonymity for
wireless body area networks,” Journal of Network and Computer Appli-
cations, vol. 106, pp. 117 – 123, 2018.
[65] D. Abbasinezhad-Mood and M. Nikooghadam, “Design and hardware
implementation of a security-enhanced elliptic curve cryptography based
lightweight authentication scheme for smart grid communications,” Fu-
ture Generation Computer Systems, vol. 84, pp. 47 – 57, 2018.
[66] M. Almulhim and N. Zaman, “Proposing secure and lightweight authen-
tication scheme for iot based e-health applications,” in 2018 20th Inter-
national Conference on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT),
pp. 1–1, Feb 2018.
[67] M. Mohammedi, M. Omar, and A. Bouabdallah, “Secure and lightweight
remote patient authentication scheme with biometric inputs for mobile
healthcare environments,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Human-
ized Computing, Sep 2017.
[68] A. Sojka, K. Piotrowski, and P. Langendoerfer, “Short ECC: A
lightweight security approach for Wireless Sensor Networks,” in 2010
International Conference on Security and Cryptography (SECRYPT),
pp. 1–5, July 2010.
[69] R. Azarderakhsh, K. U. Järvinen, and M. Mozaffari-Kermani, “Efﬁcient
Algorithm and Architecture for Elliptic Curve Cryptography for Ex-
tremely Constrained Secure Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Cir-
cuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 61, pp. 1144–1155, April 2014.
[70] Z. Liu, J. Großschädl, and D. S. Wong, Low-Weight Primes for
Lightweight Elliptic Curve Cryptography on 8-bit A VR Processors,
pp. 217–235. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2014.
[71] Z. Liu, X. Huang, Z. Hu, M. K. Khan, h. seo, and L. Zhou, “On Emerging
Family of Elliptic Curves to Secure Internet of Things: ECC Comes of
Age,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. PP,
no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2016.
[72] S. Sinha Roy, K. Järvinen, and I. Verbauwhede, Lightweight Coprocessor
for Koblitz Curves: 283-Bit ECC Including Scalar Conversion with
only 4300 Gates, pp. 102–122. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2015.
[73] B. Koziel, R. Azarderakhsh, and M. Mozaffari-Kermani, Low-Resource
and Fast Binary Edwards Curves Cryptography, pp. 347–369. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2015.
[74] D. Khleborodov, “Fast elliptic curve point multiplication based on binary
and binary non-adjacent scalar form methods,” Advances in Computa-
tional Mathematics, vol. 44, pp. 1275–1293, Aug 2018.
[75] K. Jarvinen, S. Sinha Roy, and I. Verbauwhede, “Arithmetic of τ-adic
expansions for lightweight koblitz curve cryptography,”
[76] D. Khleborodov, “Fast elliptic curve point multiplication based on win-
dow Non-Adjacent Form method,” Applied Mathematics and Computa-
tion, vol. 334, pp. 41 – 59, 2018.
[77] N. Meloni, “New Point Addition Formulae for ECC Applications,” in
Arithmetic of Finite Fields (C. Carlet and B. Sunar, eds.), (Berlin,
Heidelberg), pp. 189–201, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007.
[78] A. Sojka, K. Piotrowski, and P. Langendoerfer, “Symbiosis of a
Lightweight ECC Security and Distributed Shared Memory Middleware
in Wireless Sensor Networks,” in 2011 IEEE 30th Symposium on Reli-
able Distributed Systems Workshops, pp. 36–41, Oct 2011.
[79] E. Wenger and J. G. schädl, “An 8-bit A VR-Based Elliptic Curve Crypto-
graphic RISC Processor for the Internet of Things,” in 2012 45th Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture Workshops,
pp. 39–46, Dec 2012.
[80] E. Wenger, “Hardware architectures for msp430-based wireless sensor
nodes performing elliptic curve cryptography,” in Applied Cryptography
and Network Security (M. Jacobson, M. Locasto, P. Mohassel, and
R. Safavi-Naini, eds.), (Berlin, Heidelberg), pp. 290–306, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2013.
[81] S. Namal, K. Georgantas, and A. Gurtov, “Lightweight authentication and
key management on 802.11 with Elliptic Curve Cryptography,” in 2013
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC),
pp. 1830–1835, April 2013.
[82] A. Höller, N. Druml, C. Kreiner, C. Steger, and T. Felicijan, “Hard-
ware/software co-design of elliptic-curve cryptography for resource-
constrained applications,” in 2014 51st ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Au-
tomation Conference (DAC), pp. 1–6, June 2014.
[83] O. P. Piñol, S. Raza, J. Eriksson, and T. V oigt, “BSD-based elliptic curve
cryptography for the open Internet of Things,” in 2015 7th International
Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and Security (NTMS), pp. 1–
5, July 2015.
[84] M. Varchola, T. Guneysu, and O. Mischke, “MicroECC: A Lightweight
Reconﬁgurable Elliptic Curve Crypto-processor,” in 2011 International
Conference on Reconﬁgurable Computing and FPGAs, pp. 204–210,
Nov 2011.
[85] B. Driessen, T. Güneysu, E. B. Kavun, O. Mischke, C. Paar, and
T. Pöppelmann, “IPSecco: A lightweight and reconﬁgurable IPSec core,”
in 2012 International Conference on Reconﬁgurable Computing and
FPGAs, pp. 1–7, Dec 2012.
36 VOLUME 4, 2016


===== PAGE 37 =====
2169-3536 (c) 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2881444, IEEE Access
Lara-Nino et al.: Elliptic Curve Lightweight Cryptography: a Survey
[86] M. Schramm and A. Grzemba, “On the implementation of a lightweight
generic FPGA ECC crypto-core over GF(p),” in 2013 International
Conference on Applied Electronics, pp. 1–4, Sept 2013.
[87] E. Wenger, A Lightweight ATmega-Based Application-Speciﬁc
Instruction-Set Processor for Elliptic Curve Cryptography, pp. 1–15.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[88] D. B. Roy, P. Das, and D. Mukhopadhyay, ECC on Your Fingertips:
A Single Instruction Approach for Lightweight ECC Design in GF(p),
pp. 161–177. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016.
[89] T. Yalçin, “Compact ECDSA engine for IoT applications,” Electronics
Letters, vol. 52, no. 15, pp. 1310–1312, 2016.
[90] A. Salman, A. Ferozpuri, E. Homsirikamol, P. Yalla, J. Kaps, and
K. Gaj, “A scalable ECC processor implementation for high-speed and
lightweight with side-channel countermeasures,” in 2017 International
Conference on ReConFigurable Computing and FPGAs (ReConFig),
pp. 1–8, Dec 2017.
[91] E. Wenger, T. Korak, and M. Kirschbaum, Analyzing Side-Channel
Leakage of RFID-Suitable Lightweight ECC Hardware, pp. 128–144.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[92] J. Bosmans, S. S. Roy, K. Jarvinen, and I. Verbauwhede, “A Tiny
Coprocessor for Elliptic Curve Cryptography over the 256-bit NIST
Prime Field,” in 2016 29th International Conference on VLSI Design
and 2016 15th International Conference on Embedded Systems (VLSID),
pp. 523–528, Jan 2016.
[93] T. K. Goyal and V . Sahula, “Lightweight security algorithm for low
power IoT devices,” in 2016 International Conference on Advances in
Computing, Communications and Informatics (ICACCI), pp. 1725–1729,
Sept 2016.
[94] N. Gura, A. Patel, A. Wander, H. Eberle, and S. C. Shantz, Comparing
Elliptic Curve Cryptography and RSA on 8-bit CPUs, pp. 119–132.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004.
[95] P. Szczechowiak, L. B. Oliveira, M. Scott, M. Collier, and R. Dahab,
NanoECC: Testing the Limits of Elliptic Curve Cryptography in Sensor
Networks, pp. 305–320. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2008.
[96] P. L. Montgomery, “Speeding the Pollard and Elliptic Curve Methods of
Factorization,” vol. 48, pp. 243–243, 01 1987.
[97] A. Liu and P. Ning, “TinyECC: A Conﬁgurable Library for Elliptic Curve
Cryptography in Wireless Sensor Networks,” in Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks,
IPSN ’08, (Washington, DC, USA), pp. 245–256, IEEE Computer Soci-
ety, 2008.
[98] J. Großschädl, M. Hudler, M. Koschuch, M. Krüger, and A. Szekely,
Smart Elliptic Curve Cryptography for Smart Dust, pp. 623–634. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.
[99] H. Wang and Q. Li, “Efﬁcient implementation of public key cryptosys-
tems on mote sensors (short paper),” in Information and Communications
Security (P. Ning, S. Qing, and N. Li, eds.), (Berlin, Heidelberg), pp. 519–
528, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.
[100] T. Itoh and S. Tsujii, “A Fast Algorithm for Computing Multiplicative
Inverses in GF(2M) Using Normal Bases,” Inf. Comput., vol. 78, pp. 171–
177, Sept. 1988.
[101] D. Hein, J. Wolkerstorfer, and N. Felber, “Ecc is ready for rﬁd – a proof
in silicon,” in Selected Areas in Cryptography (R. M. Avanzi, L. Keliher,
and F. Sica, eds.), (Berlin, Heidelberg), pp. 401–413, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2009.
[102] P. L. Montgomery, “Modular multiplication without trial division,” Math-
ematics of Computation, vol. 44, pp. 519–521, 1985.
[103] J. Großschädl and G.-A. Kamendje, “Architectural enhancements for
montgomery multiplication on embedded risc processors,” in Applied
Cryptography and Network Security (J. Zhou, M. Yung, and Y . Han,
eds.), (Berlin, Heidelberg), pp. 418–434, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2003.
[104] O. Ugus, D. Westhoff, R. Laue, A. Shoufan, and S. A. Huss, “Optimized
Implementation of Elliptic Curve Based Additive Homomorphic Encryp-
tion for Wireless Sensor Networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/0903.3900, 2009.
[105] H. Hisil, K. K.-H. Wong, G. Carter, and E. Dawson, “Twisted ed-
wards curves revisited,” in Advances in Cryptology - ASIACRYPT 2008
(J. Pieprzyk, ed.), (Berlin, Heidelberg), pp. 326–343, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2008.
[106] SRI INTERNATIONAL MENLO PARK CA, “Six Technologies with
Potential Impacts on US Interests out to 2025,” tech. rep., 2008. [Online]
http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a519715.pdf [Last acces] 10-16-
2018.
[107] K. T. Nguyen, N. Oualha, and M. Laurent, “Securely outsourcing the
ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption,” World Wide Web, Aug
2017.
[108] T. Kim and R. Barbulescu, Extended Tower Number Field Sieve: A
New Complexity for the Medium Prime Case, pp. 543–571. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016.
[109] L. Chen, S. Jordan, Y .-K. Liu, D. Moody, R. Peralta, R. Perlner, and
D. Smith-Tone, “Report on Post-Quantum Cryptography,” [Online]
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2016/NIST.IR.8105.pdf [Last access]
10/10/2018.
[110] M. Mosca, “Cybersecurity in an era with quantum computers: will we
be ready?,” [Online] http://eprint.iacr.org/2015/1075.pdf [Last access]
10/10/2018.
[111] D. Jao and L. De Feo, Towards Quantum-Resistant Cryptosystems from
Supersingular Elliptic Curve Isogenies, pp. 19–34. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.
CARLOS ANDRES LARA-NINO is a PhD stu-
dent at CINVESTA V Tamaulipas in Mexico. He
is a Mechatronics Engineer with a masters degree
in Computer Science. His main area of interest is
the design of Digital Systems. His other areas of
interest include robotics, FPGAs, and hardware se-
curity. His current research focuses on the imple-
mentation of cryptographic algorithms optimized
for constrained environments.
ARTURO DIAZ-PEREZ is a full time profes-
sor at Cinvestav campus Guadalajara, Mexico.
His research areas are information security and
algorithms for high performance computing. He
received a PhD degree in Electrical Engineering
in 1998 from Cinvestav-Mexico. He co-authored
the book Cryptographic Algorithms on Reconﬁg-
urable Hardware. His recent research is focused on
hardware security in constrained devices and secu-
rity schemes for big-data storage and processing.
MIGUEL MORALES-SANDOVAL is a Com-
puter Science researcher with special interests on
Data Security, Cryptography, and Embedded Sys-
tems. He received the PhD degree in 2008 from
the National Institute for Astrophysics, Optics, and
Electronics in Mexico. He is currently focused
on the development of hardware/software security
schemes for networked embedded systems and for
the Cloud.
VOLUME 4, 2016 37